The Project Gutenberg eBook, What Norman Saw in the West, by Anonymous


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: What Norman Saw in the West


Author: Anonymous



Release Date: September 6, 2018  [eBook #57854]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT NORMAN SAW IN THE WEST***


E-text prepared by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 57854-h.htm or 57854-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57854/57854-h/57854-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57854/57854-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/whatnormansawinw00unse


Transcriber’s note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





[Illustration:

  No. 666.

  THE FALLS OF MINNEHAHA.]


WHAT NORMAN SAW IN THE WEST.

by the Author of
“Four Days in July,” and “A Winter at Woodlawn.”


   “Much is my life enriched by the images of the great Niagara, of the
   vast lakes, and of the heavenly sweetness of the prairie
   scenes.”—MARGARET FULLER.


Eight Illustrations.






New York:
Published by Carlton & Porter,
Sunday-School Union, 200 Mulberry-Street.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1859,
by Carlton & Porter,
in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the Southern District of
New-York.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CONTENTS.


             CHAPTER                                  PAGE

                  I. ON THE RAILWAY                      9

                 II. TWO DAYS AT NIAGARA                17

                III. CHILDREN MADE HAPPY                27

                 IV. THE QUEEN CITY OF THE LAKE         40

                  V. ON THE ROCK RIVER                  54

                 VI. INDIAN STORIES                     65

                VII. SECOND DAY UPON THE MISSISSIPPI    87

               VIII. OWAH-MENAH; OR THE FALLING WATER  100

                 IX. DOWN THE MISSISSIPPI              115

                  X. FOURTH DAY UPON THE MISSISSIPPI   124

                 XI. A SUNDAY IN DUBUQUE               134

                XII. DOWN THE RIVER                    138

               XIII. THE PICNIC                        151

                XIV. THE CAMP-MEETING                  158

                 XV. A SABBATH-DAY                     168

                XVI. ON THE RAIL                       178

               XVII. THE PRAIRIES                      190

              XVIII. CHICAGO, AND THE RIDE THITHER     202

                XIX. ON THE LAKES                      208

                 XX. MACKINAW AND LAKE HURON           218

                XXI. COLLINGWOOD                       240

               XXII. A SUNDAY IN TORONTO               247

              XXIII. ONCE MORE AT NIAGARA              255

               XXIV. HOME AGAIN                        263




                             Illustrations.


                                                 PAGE

                  FALLS OF MINNEHAHA                2

                  NEW YORK CITY                    12

                  PRAIRIE DU CHIEN                 73

                  INDIANS KILLING A WHITE FAMILY   79

                  MAIDEN’S ROCK                    93

                  FALLS OF ST. ANTHONY            103

                  WESTERN SETTLER’S FIRST HOME    175

                  COMMON GULL                     237




                            WHAT NORMAN SAW

                                   IN

                               THE WEST.




                               CHAPTER I.
                            ON THE RAILWAY.

             “The black steam-engine! steed of iron power;
             The wondrous steed of the Arabian tale,
             Launched on its course by pressure of a touch;
                       Ha! ha! it shouts, as on
             It gallops, dragging in its tireless path,
                       Its load of fire.”


“How still Broadway looks so early in the morning,” said Norman Lester
to his mother, as they drove down the street to take the early train.

It was an unusual sight, the long vista of the beautiful street in deep
shadow, peaceful and calm as if it knew no trampling footsteps nor
jostling vehicles. It was just waking up from its brief hour of repose.
Here and there a market cart, laden with vegetables, was jogging
leisurely on, then a carriage with travelers and trunks hastened onward.
A few waiters were standing at the doors of the hotels to speed the
parting guests, and pedestrians not ignorant of sunrise and its demands
were walking on the broad pavement. Soon the swelling tide of life would
rush through this great channel; the anxious, earnest brow, the sad and
troubled countenances; light and trifling, and bright and joyous faces,
would all be borne down that mighty stream. Business and pleasure,
noise, and hurry, and confusion would come, as the ascending sun chased
away the shadows of the great thoroughfare, and with them its brief
repose.

Norman’s thoughts went beyond Broadway and its contrast.

[Illustration:

  No. 666.

  NEW YORK CITY]

“I have actually set out on my journey to the West to see my uncle, a
journey I have been thinking of for two or three years. How I wish you
were going with us, Edward,” he said to his tall cousin, whose manliness
Norman greatly admired.

“You are to be your mother’s escort to-day, Norman,” replied Edward; “I
hope you will take good care of her. You are tall enough to make quite a
respectable escort, but I have my doubts as to your care and
thoughtfulness. I think you are rather a heedless boy, but I hope you
will come back greatly improved.”

“There is no saying,” said Norman, “what this journey may do for me.”

“We shall see; but here we are at the depôt,” was Edward’s reply.

The ferry was crossed, some oranges bought to quiet the noisy demands of
the orange woman, seats secured, good-by said to Edward, and Norman and
his mother were fairly off for a few days ride on the Erie Railroad to
Niagara.

How that terrible, untiring iron horse bore them on; how rapidly was the
panorama of wood and plain, of rock, river, and valley, unrolled before
them; how he snorted and panted, and shot onward, after a short pause
now and then to refresh the mighty giant.

              “A little water, and a grasp
              Of wood sufficient for its nerves of steel.”

The shifting landscape looked very lovely in the softened lights of that
pleasant June day. The tender green of the foliage, orchards in full
bloom, neat farm-houses, glimpses of the river Passaic, and their noble
views of a beautiful valley, in the midst of which rose the spires of
Port Jervis, lying prettily among the hills, were presented to the eye
and as rapidly withdrawn. Then the scenery became more wild as the train
rushed along the high embankment, following the course of the Delaware,
and looking down upon its rapid waters. It is a wild, rugged region;
huge trees, great prostrate trunks, scarred and blackened trophies of
the progress of the advancing settler wrestling with his gigantic foes;
log-cabins surrounded by unsightly clearings marred with frequent
stumps; fields of wheat struggling for existence in the scanty soil;
fantastical fences formed of twisted, gnarled, antler-like roots. A most
picturesque region, which might, however, call forth the comment of the
sturdy Sussex farmer: “_Picturesque!_ I don’t know what you call
picturesque; but I say, give me a soil that when you turn it up you have
something for your pains; the fine soil makes the fine country, madam.”

Norman looked with astonishment on the lofty and massive arches of the
bridges over which the railroad crosses the valley, and had a glimpse of
the water leaping down the ravine at Cascade Bridge. A number of men
were working there on the steep sandy sides of the cliff, that seemed to
afford them a most perilous footing.

One noble view he had of the Susquehanna with its islands; and then, as
they changed cars at Elmira, the rain obscured the lake and the fine
country on their way northward to Niagara.




                              CHAPTER II.
                          TWO DAYS AT NIAGARA.

             “As if God poured it from his hollow hand,
                       And had bid
             Its flood to chronicle the ages back,
             And notch his centuries in the eternal rock.”


“No clearing to-day, Norman,” said Mrs. Lester, as they left the
Cataract Hotel in the drizzling rain to cross over to Goat Island. They
paused upon the bridge, and looked upon the rapids, foaming, and
dashing, and roaring beneath.

“I can understand now,” said Norman, “what I have read about morbid
impulses, for I feel as if I would like to jump into the rushing water.”

The path down the hill to Juna Island was very muddy and slippery, and
they were obliged to walk down very carefully, lest a misstep should
plunge them into the mighty current.

Mrs. Lester told Norman of a happy party that once crossed the bridge to
this island; of the little girl playfully thrown toward the fall by a
young man; of the sudden terror that led her to jump from his arms; of
his fearful plunge to save the life he had periled, and of the twain
borne over that giddy verge. Those fresh young lives, gone in one
moment, with all of earthly hope and aspiration.

It was fearful to think of; but how many are daily and hourly borne, by
the mighty tides of worldliness and sin, over a more tremendous
precipice; and there are no cries or prayers of pitying love; no man
careth for their souls!

Norman was very silent as he looked for the first time on that wondrous
fall, the sight of which, he said, took away his strength. He felt awed
and solemnized by this mighty display of God’s mighty works.

By the path on Goat Island, not beautiful and attractive as usual, for
the trees had not put on their heavy foliage, and the path was wet and
muddy, they walked to a little rural building, where, sheltered from the
falling rain, they could look down upon the Horse-Shoe Fall. On one
point in this magnificent cataract Norman loved to look; it was the
angular central point where the stream is greatest in volume, and where
its exquisite hue of emerald green continually breaks into snowy
whiteness.

“I have heard those falling waters compared to the robes of a goddess
continually falling from her shoulders,” said Mrs. Lester; “but the
thought is scarcely spiritual enough to satisfy one.”

“It seems too grand to say anything about it,” said Norman; “it makes me
so silent.”

           “‘Come then, expressive Silence, muse thy praise,’

is a most fitting invocation at this place,” replied his mother.

“I have been looking all round for you,” said a lady, whom they had
found the day before to be a most agreeable fellow-traveler, as she
alighted from the carriage, “and they told me at the hotel that you had
gone to Goat Island, so I came here with the expectation of finding
you.”

After looking awhile at the fall, they descended the hill, crossed the
Terrapin bridge, and ascending the winding staircase in the stone tower,
they came out on the circular balcony above. It was fearful to look from
that giddy height down into the foaming depths below, and in the midst
of those maddening waters one could scarcely believe that the town had a
foundation sufficiently firm to resist their onward course. The columns
of spray, driven by the east wind, almost obscured the opposite cliffs.

Mrs. Bushnell wished Mrs. Lester and Norman to accompany her in her
drive round Goat Island home; but they preferred another hour spent in
sight of the fall. Many carriages drove up while they sat there, and men
with cigars in their mouths jumped out, ran down the hill, over the
bridge, and up the stairs to the tower, where they took a hurried look
at the mighty torrent, and speedily regained their carriages and were
off.

“I really think, mother,” said Norman, “that we are enjoying Niagara
more than any one. We are having such a long look.”

In the afternoon they accompanied Mrs. Bushnell and her nephew to the
British side of the river. They crossed the Suspension Bridge, about two
miles below the falls. It is a miracle of art, a beautiful work of man,
in harmonious contrast with the stupendous works of God. Norman, who had
been studying his guide book, told them that there were more than
eighteen million feet of wire, and that the aggregate length of wire was
more than four thousand miles.

They rode over the lower carriage way of the bridge, which is a single
span, eight hundred feet in length between the massive towers by which
it is supported. In crossing they had a fine distant view of the two
falls, and of the fearful chasm beneath, with its solemn deep waters,
quiet as if exhausted by their recent plunge.

The afternoon was decidedly stormy, the rain fell fast, dimming the
glass of the carriage, and driving in upon them, when the window was
open. The spray hung before the falls as a dense cloud, obscuring more
than half of them from view.

On their return Mr. White, Mrs. Bushnell’s nephew, took Norman by the
hand, and walked over the railroad bridge, while the carriage passed
beneath. Norman looked with wonder at those mighty cables, twisted with
so many wires, and supporting with their interlacing ropes that great
structure weighing eight hundred tons. It seemed so solid and
substantial, that Norman did not think of any danger in crossing it, air
hung as it is over the great abyss.

Another cloudy day, but it was a happy day to Norman and his mother. As
they loitered at Point View and on Goat Island, Norman took three or
four pencil sketches, to be copied and filled up at his leisure. He
gathered some pretty white and blue flowers on Goat Island, and arranged
them fancifully in an Indian birch-bark canoe which he had just
purchased.

“Mother,” said he, holding it up to her, “this canoe looks just like one
of which I have seen a picture. It illustrates an Indian legend of the
paradise of flowers. They are represented as still retaining their
flowerlike forms, leisurely reclining in canoes, floating gently in the
placid streams of the spirit land.”

“How pretty it looks,” said his mother, “with those pendant white
blossoms; I shall always associate this flowery canoe and its graceful
legend with this turn in the path on Goat Island.”

“Are we not having a delightful afternoon, mother? the air is so
pleasant, and there are patches of blue sky, and it is nice not to carry
an umbrella,” said Norman.

“We should not have thought of that element of satisfaction, but for the
experience of these two days; as it is, we are prepared fully to
appreciate it.”

They very much enjoyed their walk up to the “Three Sisters;” the rapids
were of the most beautiful green, flecked with white foam, and in the
absence of sunlight they could look, without being dazzled, upon the
graceful majestic flow of waters. How many longing, lingering looks were
given from each spot as, at the approach of evening, they reluctantly
retraced their steps.

Norman had amused himself during the day in looking over Indian
curiosities, and in addition to a birch-bark canoe worked in porcupine
quills, pincushions, and mats worked in beads, had purchased a
Derbyshire-spar cup and whistle at the store near the bridge to Goat
Island, with the assurance that they were turned at Niagara, out of
Table Rock!

A parting glance from Point View the next morning before breakfast,
after which they took the cars for Buffalo, where they found Professor
L. awaiting them. A long ride on the railroad, near the shore of Lake
Erie, (which was not however often visible,) carried them through
Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Michigan, and then through Indiana and Illinois.
All these states looked very much alike to Norman as he hurried past
groves, ravines, towns, and prairies, and after a day and night’s travel
arrived at E., a village near Chicago, without any very definite
impressions of the shifting scenery that had passed before his vision.




                              CHAPTER III.
                          CHILDREN MADE HAPPY.

               “We are willing, we are ready;
                 We would learn, if you would teach,
               We have hearts that yearn to duty;
               We have minds alive to beauty,
                 Souls that any height can reach.”

                                             MARY HOWITT.


Most grateful was the quiet repose of Mrs. Rivers’s pretty home after
the long wearisome ride in the cars, most pleasant was it to be kindly
welcomed by old friends in their new homes. The village seemed full of
purpose and aspiration, springing up in an oak opening on the shore of
Lake Michigan, and clustering round the two literary institutions that
have called it into existence. The familiar faces gathered around Mrs.
Rivers’s tea-table recalled many dear and cherished associations, and
brought back pleasant pictures of the past.

Norman’s pleasures were in the present. He was soon off to the lake with
George Rivers, wandering a while on its pebbly shore, and then sitting
on the pier fishing. They dropped their lines in the water, and sat
waiting for a bite. Long and patiently they sat, the sun burning their
faces, but their patience was not rewarded with success, for they got no
fish. Norman found more companions in the little Randolphs and Henrys,
who were fishing at the same time. They lived a few doors from George
Rivers, and they came to see Norman, and invited him to dinner and to
tea. He had many pleasant talks, and many games with his new friends,
who were very kind to him.

Sunday morning came; the weather doubtful, uncertain, showery. Mrs.
Lester heard with great pleasure a lecture from her former pastor, and a
sermon from an old friend. The Sunday school was invited to visit the
Biblical Institute that afternoon, to see some idols that had just
arrived from China, and to hear Profesor L. lecture upon them. The
children were on tip-toe with expectation; but the superintendent, after
consultation with the teachers, decided that it would not be prudent to
go; the clouds were threatening, and the grass was wet with the recent
rain. With his pleasant face and his kindly voice, he told the children
of this decision, and then asked all who were in favor of going to the
Biblical Institute the next afternoon, at four o’clock, to raise their
hands. Every hand was raised, but there was a new difficulty. A
professor in the Institute said that it would be better to defer the
visit till the next Sabbath, as it would interfere with the students’
recitations on Monday afternoon.

“Not the next Sabbath,” said another gentleman; “there will be a general
class-meeting here then, which we all wish to attend.”

“All, then,” said the superintendent, “who are in favor of visiting the
Institute this day fortnight, will signify it by holding up their
hands.”

Not an uplifted hand was seen; the expression of opinion was very
decided. The children did not believe in a pleasure so long delayed. The
professor, with great good-humor, then said that they were disposed to
gratify the children, and that they would so arrange their recitations
as to give them a cordial welcome.

“My text is at the Institute,” said Professor L., as he rose to speak to
the children, “and my audience here;” but he contrived to talk to them
without a text so agreeably, that the children voted that he should be
invited to address them the next afternoon, which he partly consented to
do.

It was a very pleasant looking Sunday school, teachers and children all
in their places, notwithstanding the wet walks and the dark clouds. The
children looked bright and happy, interested in their lessons, attentive
to their teachers, and they sang sweet hymns with great spirit and
earnestness.

Monday was bright and beautiful, and many little hearts beat high with
the thoughts of the afternoon’s pleasure. How glad they were that it had
not been put off for a fortnight. It was a pretty sight to see the
procession of children winding through the grove of grand old trees on
the high bank of the lake, whose blue waters sparkled in the sunlight.
The white sails of schooners were seen in the distant horizon, and the
lake looked so peaceful that it was difficult to imagine it roughened by
the tempest, uttering its loud roar as its great waves dashed against
the bank, tearing it away, and prostrating the lofty trees that adorned
it.

The children walked into the Institute, and entering the room on the
right, saw the walls covered with pictures of hideous Chinese idols. One
of the great idols they had come to see was a gigantic figure, dressed
in flowing robes of white muslin, with a ghastly face, rolling eyes,
grinning mouth, and a crown on his head. He was attended by his servant,
who had a horrible black face, and long flowing black garments. Such
figures as these are carried through the streets in China to receive the
worship of the people; and thus religion, which should elevate, only
debases them; and fear is the ruling motive instead of love.

Norman thought of that scene in the idol temple in Rangoon: the room
lined with images of Boodh, in a sitting posture, with folded hands,
bearing lamps to give light to a Christian prayer-meeting; Havelock,
with his Bible in his hand, surrounded by a hundred Christian soldiers,
praying to the God of heaven, and singing praises to the Lord Christ in
this famous idol temple. Well, the day will come when all the idols will
be cast to the moles and the bats, and when from every hill-top and
valley, from the broad prairie and the green savannah, the incense of
praise shall ascend to the one living and true God.

After the children had passed around the rooms, and looked at the idols,
they went up stairs and seated themselves in the chapel to hear
Professor L. The fresh breeze blew in the window, and the lake spread
its broad bosom beneath the eye; stripes of green and blue gave variety
to its surface; little sail-boats sailed rapidly by; and a large steamer
went proudly on its way. It was pleasant to look out upon this noble
view, and listen at the same time to Professor L.’s narration of what he
had seen during his three years in China.

He gave an interesting account of Miss Aldersey, a noble English woman,
who, while in her pretty English home, in the midst of kind friends, and
social joys, and religious privileges, felt her heart so moved by the
spiritual destitution of the Chinese, that she left home and friends,
and all pleasant, familiar things, and went over the seas to China.
Freely she had received; freely she gave fortune, time, and toil to the
great work to which she had consecrated her life. She opened a school,
and gathered in the poor neglected children. Female children are
despised in China, and many of these poor little things, who had no one
to love them, found a home beneath Miss Aldersey’s roof. Day after day
she sat teaching these ignorant little girls, and telling them of Jesus
and the home he has gone to prepare for his people. They listened to the
new and wonderful story, and their hearts were opened to receive these
heavenly truths.

One of them, after the custom of the country, had been bethrothed when
she was four years old, to a boy several years older, and the time
approached when she was called upon to be married. Part of the marriage
ceremony consists of bowing down before ancestral tablets, containing
images of their ancestors, and burning incense to them. This the young
Christian Chinese girl refused to do. She loved Jesus, she worshiped
God, and she would not bow down before any idol.

In vain her parents expostulated and entreated. In vain they offered her
reward, and threatened punishment. She was firm in her refusal to break
the law of God. They beat her and tortured her, but her steadfast heart,
stayed upon God, knew no fear. Faithful to her Christian profession,
this brave girl continued in the path of Christian duty, unmoved by
tribulation and wrath and all the devices of wicked men.

The children then sang the noble missionary hymn,

                    “From Greenland’s icy mountains,
                    From India’s coral strand,”

and were dismissed for a little recreation in the grove, where there was
a swing, and cool shade, and grassy turf. Just before sunset the
children were called together, and again in regular order walked
homeward, with faces glowing with enjoyment, and minds and hearts filled
with happy thoughts and memories.

Wednesday morning Norman went with his mother to the lake, just after
breakfast. The waves were gently kissing the shore, and hours passed
swiftly away as they listened to the soothing sound and gathered curious
pebbles. They found some small fossils, with the remains of shells and
animals in them, and Norman was greatly delighted with one that his
mother picked up, that looked as if it had on it a single pearl set in
gold. They felt sorry to leave the pleasant beach; but the morning had
already gone, and it was time to go to Mr. Henry’s to dinner. On their
return they found a kind invitation from Mrs. Harris to take tea at the
Institute. There were about forty students at the tea-table, and after
tea they had prayers. Instead of the reading of the Scripture, verses
were repeated, thus enabling all who wished to participate in the
devotional exercises; and noble and comforting promises, and precious
truths, were uttered in varying tones. That company of young men were
girding on their armor, that they might fight as good soldiers under the
Captain of their salvation. They were preparing themselves for their
life-work; some of them to sow the “precious seed” over the broad
prairies of Illinois, by the rocky bluffs and wood-crowned hills of
Wisconsin, and the blue waters of Minnesota; while others were looking
to the lands of the East—to Bulgaria, and India, and China. It was
pleasant to exchange a few brief words with these young men who, by the
eye of faith, could see more abundant harvests than those which reward
the Western husbandmen. They had asked the Lord of the harvest to send
them as reapers into these fields of promise, looking forward to that
blessed time when they shall “return with joy bringing their sheaves
with them.”

Mrs. Lester afterward looked upon the portrait of the Christian woman to
whose liberality this institution owes its existence. That portrait
ought to hang on its walls. There is a queenly look about the fine
figure, and the way the head is set on the shoulders, and blended
goodness and intelligence in the countenance. In the evening of the same
day Mrs. Lester was in the room where Mrs. Garrett died, and she thought
of the blissful visions that may have floated about that dying pillow
glimpses of refreshing and perennial streams to make the wilderness
rejoice and blossom as the rose. Her life was not spent in vain on the
earth. Regular and consistent in her daily walks of duty and piety, she
has, by the judicious bestowment of ample means, prolonged her
usefulness on the earth, linked herself to holy activities through
coming time, and set in motion trains of influence, the mighty results
of which may only be known in the morning of the resurrection. She made
to herself friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when she
failed they might receive her into everlasting habitations.




                              CHAPTER IV.
                      THE QUEEN CITY OF THE LAKE.

              “I saw the domes before me rise,
                The lake behind me swell;
              I thought upon the bygone days,
              When nature wore a different phase,
                And man a different skin;
              And stretching far, through plain and swamp,
              I saw the Indian’s fiery camp,
              And heard the buffalo’s marching tramp,
              And felt the mammoth’s earthquake stamp,
                And all that once had been.

              “A sudden change came o’er my dream;
              I must have waked and dropp’d my theme.
              For ships and cars, in fire and steam,
                Begirt the horizon round;
              Tall houses rose, with shops in front,
              And bricks piled up, as bricks are wont,
                In cloud-capp’d turrets frown’d;
              And through the living, boiling throng
              Thunder’d a thousand carts along,
              And railroads howl’d their shrieking song,
                Across the groaning ground.”


Norman had many little friends to say good-by to as he left for the cars
on Thursday morning, and very many pleasant memories to take with him.

Kind friends were waiting for them at the station at Chicago, and they
were soon driving through its busy streets. They approached the river,
which has _made_ the town, affording as it does a safe harbor for
vessels. This river runs due east and falls into the lakes, receiving,
about a mile from its mouth, branches from the north and the south. The
river and its branches, lined with substantial warehouses, divide the
city into the north, south and west side. On approaching the bridge it
suddenly swung round to give passage to a large schooner towed by a
little puffing black tug, which gave its shrill whistle as a signal for
the drawbridge to open, and then went panting and snorting through.

While waiting for the bridge to resume its place, Emily Percy, a
blue-eyed, fair-haired little girl who was seated beside Norman, showed
him an old wooden house that formerly belonged to Fort Dearborn, and
that, with the light-house, was the only thing left to tell of its
existence.

“Norman,” said Mrs. Lester, “this is the fort spoken of in those lines
you are so fond of repeating about the Indians:

                ‘Where, to repel their fierce attack,
                Fort Dearborn rear’d across their track
                  Its log-constructed walls.
                For forty years these fronts of wood
                The tempest and the foe withstood;
                And many a night of fire and flood,
                The dauntless garrison made good
                  Their supper in its halls.’”

“It is difficult to fancy any Indians here, in the heart of this busy
city,” said Norman.

“And yet this great city,” said Mrs. Percy “is the growth of twenty-five
years. In 1831 there were but four arrivals, two brigs and two
schooners, and now there are eight thousand.”

“The lonely garrison that abandoned this fort in 1812,” said Mrs.
Lester, “would have been rather astonished, could the vision of this
city have risen up: before them.”

“Why did they abandon the fort, mother?” asked Norman.

“They thought it best when they heard of General Hull’s surrender at
Detroit. Soon after leaving the fort they were attacked by a large body
of Indians, to whom they surrendered, on condition that their lives
should be spared. Notwithstanding this promise, the Indians cruelly
murdered several of them.”

“You must not forget to tell of Mrs. Heald,” said Mrs. Percy, “for I
think we may call her the heroine of Chicago.”

“I leave that to you,” replied Mrs. Lester.

“An Indian,” said Mrs. Percy, “approached her with uplifted tomahawk,
when, with great presence of mind, she looked him full in the face, and
smilingly said, ‘Surely you would not kill a squaw!’ This Indian warrior
was disarmed by this appeal, and the lady’s life was saved.”

The schooner towed by the potent little tug soon passed through, but
they were detained by a sloop that made its way very slowly, and Norman
had time to look at the vessels in the river, many of them loaded with
grain, twenty-five millions of bushels being annually received at this
grain port. He also watched with great interest the working of a
dredging machine used to take mud out of the river and thus deepen its
channel.

A great number of carriages and carts awaited the return of the moving
bridge, and many, pedestrians were ready to leap upon it as it
approached. The bridges are a daily school of patience for the citizens
of Chicago.

The few days at Mrs. Percy’s Norman enjoyed very much. He took long
walks with Emily about the north side of the city, which is pleasantly
shaded with trees and adorned with many fine residences. They drove out
too with Mrs. Percy on Michigan Avenue, a noble street, with rows of
fine houses built of beautiful cream-colored stone, and pretty cottages
embowered in shrubbery, fronting on the lake. The railway is laid
through the water, at a short distance from the shore, and the interval
affords a fine safe place for rowing, sheltered as it is from the sudden
storms of the lake. There were a number of pretty row boats rapidly
darting to and fro, and young people enjoying the air and exercise on
the quiet waters.

They returned by Wabash Avenue, adorned with its noble churches. They
alighted, and went in to look at the new Methodist church, which was
nearly finished. Norman thought it very beautiful. This, and the
handsome Presbyterian church at the next corner, are built of the
cream-colored stone which gives such a cheerful light aspect to the
edifices in Chicago. The Second Presbyterian church is the most
antique-looking structure in the city. It is built of a whitish stone,
spotted with black, giving it somewhat the aspect of the white marble of
St. Paul’s begrimed with the smoke and dust of London. This stone was
found on the prairies; the black is a sort of bitumen that exudes from
it, and as the quarry is exhausted, this church will be unique as well
as antique in its appearance.

Norman was amused at the inequality of the sidewalks, sometimes rising
above the carriage way, sometimes depressed far below, so that the
pedestrian is obliged continually to go up and down steps, or inclined
planes, and to mind his ways if he wishes to avoid a fall. The new
stores open finely on the elevated sidewalks, and Norman was astonished
to see the splendid rows of stores with elaborate iron fronts. The older
houses and stores must be entered by descending steps to reach their
level. Mrs. Percy told Norman the reason of this, that the city was
built on a flat prairie, so low that the water would not run off, and
the streets could not be drained; and so this enterprising people are
lifting up the whole city six or seven feet, and there must be
inequality of surface while this transition process is going on. Norman
saw a frame house, mounted on rollers, leisurely making its way through
the streets.

Charlie Percy, who was several years older than Norman had a chemical
cabinet, and the boys had a very animated evening, trying a number of
experiments, making colored fires, and making fire jump about the
surface of the water.

“Here is an invitation for you, children,” said Mr. Percy, “which I have
no doubt you will be very glad to accept. Mr. and Mrs. Bowers called to
invite us to accompany them to Green Park, where they are to have a
pic-nic.”

“How pleasant that will be,” exclaimed Emily; “I am sure you will like
to go, Norman.”

The children were ready immediately after dinner, when Mr. Bowers’s
carriage drove up for them, and at the station they found quite a party
of children, baskets in hand, with their mothers and fathers, bound for
the pic-nic. They were a joyous family party, Mr. Bowers’s sisters and
their families. Norman looked from the cars upon the stately buildings
of Michigan Avenue, and there was not time to look at much more, for a
few minutes brought them to Green Park, and the party were soon out of
the cars, and on a bank overlooking the lake. It is a pretty place,
grassy turf, graveled walks, grateful shade, and rustic summer houses;
better than all, the pleasant beach with its rounded pebbles, and the
constant dash of its gentle waves. The children had merry games of tag
and puss-in-the-corner, then they wandered along the beach, and then
they came with sharpened appetites to inquire when the baskets were to
be opened. “You may go and bring them now,” was the welcome response.

“Are we not to sit round the table in the summer-house?” asked one of
the little girls.

“No,” replied her mamma, “it is cooler here.”

Willing feet ran to the rustic arbor, and willing hands brought the
baskets from the rustic table. They seated themselves on the grass and
ate the biscuits and sardines and sandwiches, and the gingerbread and
cake. A little girl whom they did not know was playing near her father
and mother, who were seated on a bench at a little distance. One of the
children, with thoughtful kindness, asked her mother’s permission to
take some biscuits and cake to the little stranger, and joyfully she ran
off to offer of their abundance to the little one.

After they had done full justice to the contents of the baskets, and
picked up pebbles on the beach, they sat in the large summer house and
sang hymns, sweet familiar hymns, sung by sweet childish voices,
sobering and sanctifying the pleasures of that happy Saturday afternoon.

At the station they found a merry party of school-girls who had walked
out in the morning to gather flowers on the prairie. They were in high
glee; their large straw hats were wreathed with oak leaves, and their
hands were filled with great bunches of flowers,

                “The golden and the flame-like flower.”

Norman said good-by to Emily Percy at her door, for he and his mother
were to spend the Sabbath with Mrs. Bowers, and a pleasant Sabbath it
was. The conversation, in harmony with the day, on the piazza, after
breakfast, beneath the shade of lofty spreading trees; the sermons and
services of morning, afternoon, and evening, different in tone and
character, but all profitable and pleasing; the visit to the large and
interesting Sunday school, in which Mrs. Bowers taught a class, made the
Sabbath a delightful one.

Monday morning Mrs. Percy took Mrs. Lester and Norman and Emily to her
husband’s grain warehouse, the top of which they reached after ascending
many flights of steps. The roof is of canvas, covered with tar, upon
which, while it is warm, pebbles are thrown, making a durable and fire
proof roof. The city lay beneath them; they could mark its great extent,
trace the course of its dividing rivers, with their sails, and steamers,
and propellers; see trains of cars arriving and departing; count the
spires which

                 “With silent fingers point to heaven,”

and around all see the great lake and the encircling prairie.

The warehouse was filled with dust, as the machinery was in motion.
Norman watched the elevators lifting up the grain from the rail-car on
one side to the fifth story of the warehouse, where it is weighed and
poured into great bins, whence it is discharged into vessels on the
other side. The elevator is a series of buckets on an endless band.
Thousands of bushels, from the wide prairies of Illinois, are thus
elevated, weighed, and transferred from car to boat, to be sent to the
Eastern states or to Europe.

The saddest sight Norman saw in this city was the great number of
saloons, as they call the shops where liquor is sold, where drunkards
are made, and where many an unwary victim is lured to destruction. In
almost every block, they tempt the thoughtless; music sounds her
welcome; vice puts on her most attractive mien; and young men forget a
father’s counsel, a mother’s prayers; and for the momentary
gratification of their appetites they offer up reputation, character,
health, life, and their eternal all; a costly sacrifice! Everything
lost, and nothing gained but degradation, misery, and death.




                               CHAPTER V.
                           ON THE ROCK RIVER.

            “These are the gardens of the desert; these,
            The unshorn fields, boundless and beautiful,
            For which the speech of England has no name,
            The prairies.... Lo! they stretch
            In airy undulations far away,
            As if the ocean, in his gentlest swell,
            Stood still, with all his rounded billows, fix’d
            And motionless forever.”—BRYANT.


A railway ride over the beautiful prairies took Norman and his mother to
their place of destination. How soft and gentle were those prairie
swells, looking like English park scenery, relieved as is the vast
expanse of meadow by scattered groves of trees. The fine unbroken
horizon line tells you that you do not see a greater extent of country,
only because your eye has no greater capabilities; that onward, and all
around, the vast prairie lies in its verdure and beauty; that there, as
here, the flowers are springing; that you may travel north, south, east,
and west, hundreds of miles, and still that undulating prairie, in its
“encircling vastness,” will lie around you like the sea.

At the station Norman found his uncle looking out anxiously for him, and
he was soon pressed tenderly in his arms.

“Well, my boy,” said his uncle, “I feared we should be disappointed
again to-day. How glad I am to see you once more, though you have so
grown I would not have known you.”

“How is Aunt Ellen?” asked Norman.

“Very well, she is waiting anxiously for you at home; she has been
counting the days since you wrote you were coming.”

“How well I remember,” said Norman, “when I was a little boy, how she
let me whittle in her room, and how she brought me bread and butter with
white sugar on it.”

“That bread and butter and sugar made a deep impression on his mind,”
said Mrs. Lester; “he has always connected the thought of it with his
Aunt Ellen.”

“And there is your Aunt Ellen at the gate looking for you,” said his
uncle.

Norman loved his uncle and aunt very much, and was very glad to be with
them once more. He loved to sit by his uncle’s side and read to him, and
tell him about his school, and about his cottage home, and about his
little cousins, Bessie and Edith, with whom he spent so many pleasant
summer days, rambling about the woods and among the rocks.

His uncle was an invalid, obliged continually to recline on his couch,
but he was always cheerful, always happy. A sister said of him, that if
you put him on the top of a rock he would be happy; and the secret of
this was, that his heart was filled with love to God, and that he had
constant communion with his blessed Saviour. The peace of God lay upon
his countenance; he had no troubled or vexing thoughts.

He loved to read and hear about the progress of Christ’s kingdom, and
about what good men are doing to bring about the fulfillment of that
prayer, “Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.”

Norman was very busy for several days, copying his sketches of Niagara,
and doing them in pastil, and his uncle took great interest in the
progress of his work.

One day they went with a clergyman, Aunt Ellen’s brother, to a seminary,
built on a commanding eminence above the town. After seeing the scholars
do their sums very rapidly on the black-board, they went to the upper
story of the building, and looked upon an extensive view. To the north
the rapid river, with its high banks and wooded islands; to the east,
the prairie, stretching out far in the distance. The spires and
buildings of the town toward the south, with the fine arches of the
railing embankments, while the river, whose falls filled the air with
sound, was spanned with the noble arches of the railroad bridge, and the
broken ones of several ruined bridges, swept away by the recent floods.

After leaving the seminary they wandered in the oak grove that adorns
the bluff upon which it stands, and looked down on the ravine which
bounds the grounds to the north.

“Now, mother,” said Norman, one morning after breakfast, “for a walk on
the prairies.”

“I am ready,” replied Mrs. Lester; “it is a cool, gray morning; just the
day for such a ramble.”

On and on they wandered; Norman running to and fro, as the brilliant
tint of some flower caught his eye, made his mother the bearer of all
his floral treasures. A fine bouquet he had after a while, yellow
lupins, the blue spiderwort, the purple phlox, an orange flower very
much like the wallflower, and the painted cup, made classic by Bryant’s
verse:

                               “Scarlet tufts
           Are glowing in the green, like flakes of fire;
           The wanderers of the prairies know them well,
           And call that brilliant flower, the Painted Cup.”

They first walked toward the south, where they could have glimpses of
the river; but at length they directed their course to the east, to an
octagon house, that stood like a light-house on a hill. Crossing the
railroad, they paused a while to see the gravel-train get its load of
sand from the banks.

“There,” said Norman, as the locomotive gave a snort or two, as if in
impatience at the pause; “there stands the grand old fellow to be looked
at, as Mr. Beecher says.”

A far-reaching view of the undulating prairie, heightened at intervals
by flashes of the river gliding among the fertile meadows, repaid them
for the ascent to the octagon house.

On their return they stood beneath a railroad bridge, and saw two long
freight trains pass over it. They passed a rural town that had recently
sprung up in an “oak opening,” and arrived at home with flowers and
pleasant remembrances of their four-mile walk on the prairies.

Norman’s quiet pleasures by his uncle’s side, his reading and sketching,
soon gave place to more active out-of-door amusements. He formed a
friendship with two boys who lived in the neighborhood, who were so
well-trained, that his uncle readily consented to his intimacy with
them.

“Even a child is known by his doings;” and it is well when a boy has
already formed a character which inspires confidence, and allows parents
and friends safely to trust in him. Such a lad will probably retain in
manhood the respect and confidence he has won in boyhood.

Norman went every evening with Alfred and Herbert Walduf to bathe in the
Rock river, and sometimes he went with them to fish, or walked with them
in the woods.

These boys were regular attendants at the Sunday school of which Mr.
Laurence, Aunt Ellen’s brother, was superintendent, and they asked
Norman to go with them to school. How earnestly the children listened
when their superintendent told them of the sad fate of four of their
number who had recently joined with them in their hymns of praise. They
had removed a short time before with their parents to a town not far
distant, where their father had received a call to preach. A letter had
been received from their mother, describing the situation of their new
home, by the side of a little stream, and saying that she thought she
had found a pleasant resting-place.

Father, mother, and eight children were all gathered together one
peaceful Sabbath; the two elder sons having come home from their places
of business to spend a few days with their family. Kind and affectionate
words were spoken—a thankful retrospect of the past, and hopeful
glancings to the future.

The next day the little stream began to rise and swell, and the children
greatly enjoyed the transformation of their quiet brook into the rushing
torrent. Enjoyment, however, gave place to alarm as the waters rose
higher and higher, till they reached the house.

Some men from the village came down and advised them to seek a more
secure shelter. On measuring the waters, however, they found that they
had fallen four inches; and the father, thinking that the worst was
over, concluded that they had better remain in the house. The men,
gathering up some clothes that had been left out to dry, handed them to
the inmates of the house, and left them.

There were anxious hearts in that lonely dwelling that night, as they
listened to the rushing waters without. The baby wakened, and the elder
brother, to amuse and quiet the little thing, gave it his watch to play
with. Suddenly there was a crash, and the house was loosened from its
foundations. There was a cry heard from the wife and mother, and then
all other sounds were lost in the roar of the waters. Stunned, half
unconscious, the father felt himself borne onward by the rushing flood.
As the stream carried him past an overhanging tree, he caught hold of
its branches, and there he hung till the morning light brought help and
rescue. He was a childless man; the loving faces of wife and children he
was to see no more till the morning of the resurrection. Four of the
bodies were found the next morning beneath the ruins of the house. The
infant’s hand clasped the watch, still ticking, while its own pulse was
stopped forever. The waters of the stream, swelled by the great freshet,
had been obstructed by a culvert on the railway till it gave way, and
the accumulated mass of waters had swept on with resistless impetuosity,
working ruin and death.

And then Mr. Laurence enforced the lesson so often taught, so soon
forgotten, of so living that when the cry is heard, “Behold the
bridegroom cometh!” whether at midnight or in the morning, we may go
forth with joy to meet him.




                              CHAPTER VI.
                            INDIAN STORIES.

              Home of the Indian’s wild-born race,
                The stalwart and the brave;
              Alike their camp and hunting-place,
                Their battle-field and grave;
              Where late gigantic warriors stood,
              As thick as pine-trees in the wood,
                Or snipes on Jersey shore;
              “Tecumseh,” “Beaver,” and “Split Log,”
              And “Keokuk,” and “Horned Frog,”
              And “Blackhawk,” “Wolf,” and “Yelping Dog,”
              And “Possum Tail,” and “Pollywog,”
                And many hundred more.—F. G. H.


Again in the cars for a journey to St. Anthony’s Falls, and again the
fertile rolling prairie met the eye on every side. The view was somewhat
marred by the high board fences of the railroad, that in some places hid
those broad flowery fields. Some curious mounds, round, smooth, and
green, extended like a chain from east to west, and looked as if they
were artificial formations, lying as they do on the bosom of the
prairie; perhaps the burial-place of a departed race.

Soon the high lands on the Mississippi were seen. A portly gentleman of
Galena, just returning from a convention at Springfield, pointed them
out to Mrs. Lester, and said, “Ma’am, there is no such river in the
world; you never saw such scenery; you would not look at the Hudson
after it.”

“That would be unfortunate,” replied Mrs. Lester, “as my home is on the
Hudson. Is the scenery finer than the Highlands and the Catskills?”

“Well, ma’am, I can’t exactly say as to that; I have not been below
Albany.”

“Ah, then, you have not seen our beautiful river, as it cannot boast of
much grandeur above Albany.”

Galena is a curious town, built on the side of a very steep hill; the
houses rising one above another, and in a picturesque, romantic region.
The road lay for some time along the bank of the Fever River, and Norman
looked in vain for the lead mines, for which this part of the country is
so famous. A very fine specimen of the lead ore was afterward given him.

“Ah! look, mother!” he exclaimed, as the descending sun that had been
partially vailed, shone through a rift in the clouds, and was brightly
mirrored in the placid waters of the river. Low wooded banks and islands
were also mirrored there as well as the shining orb and the large dark
masses of clouds. It was the great sight of the afternoon.

At Dunleith, on the line between Illinois and Wisconsin, the terminus of
the Illinois Central road, they went on board the Grey Eagle, the best
boat on the Upper Mississippi.

A sunset on the _Missi-sepe_, the Great River! It was radiant and
golden, but without any pomp of crimson clouds, of long-trailing glory.

Norman had a fine view of Dubuque, built on a natural terrace on the
opposite shore, and creeping up four of five ravines between the great
bluffs which rise directly behind the town. After tea, as the boat was
not to leave till morning, he watched the lights gleaming out from the
city below, and the scattered dwellings above, and then went to bed in
his state-room.

His mother had not met the friends whom she had expected to join at
Dunleith for this excursion, and she felt somewhat disappointed. The
morning came in clouds and drizzling rain. The hills were vailed; but as
the boat went very near the western shore, the passengers could admire
the wealth of foliage, and the rich greens of those primeval forests. A
road ran along the river bank, and some men were quarrying stone; near
this was a deserted log-house.

On passing a very high red bluff, that stood in the forest, like an
Egyptian idol, so curiously was it fashioned, Mrs. Lester ran to the
east side of the boat to call Norman to look at it. He came, but after a
hasty glance returned to his play, which for the time wholly absorbed
him. He was engaged in some merry games with Helen and Frank Lisle, and
he had no thought for anything else. Mrs. Lisle found that Norman was
the son of a minister who had been an intimate friend of her sister’s.
“My sister has very frequently spoken to me of him,” she said; “I almost
think I had known him. My sister named her eldest son after your father,
Norman, and I have been strangely reminded of Lester at your age all the
morning.”

Norman remained a while to look at a large raft which his mother had
called him to see. There were twenty men upon it; some of them with red
shirts, and another wrapping a white blanket around him. There was a
shed where one man was cooking the dinner, and a board table in front
for their meals. A gentleman said that a raft of that size was worth
about seven thousand dollars. There were a number of rafts floating by
this western shore. One misses the white sails of the Hudson on the
Mississippi, where rafts, and steamboats, and an occasional sail-boat,
are the only craft on its waters.

There were ravines running up among the hills, and near the shore were
layers of white stone piled regularly as if laid in mortar. Castellated
bluffs peeped out from the encircling verdure, and low islands, covered
with willows, were emerging from the recent floods. From behind one of
these the steamer Northern Light appeared, her bright golden star on a
back ground of green.

After dinner the aspect of things brightened. The clouds rolled away,
and the clear blue sky appeared in its soft beauty. The eastern now
became the most interesting side; noble bluffs were seen far above the
lofty oaks and maples, like some ancient towers, the strongholds of the
former lords of the soil. The town of Guttenbay is on a table land at
the foot of one of these bluffs, and beyond it a range of rounded hills,
softly rising above wooded islands. “O look!” said Helen Lisle, “at that
beautiful rainbow in the spray.” It was no fleeting vision, but all the
afternoon the radiant bow, with its hues of blended brightness, afforded
them a beautiful object for contemplation.

“See those trees,” cried Norman; “they look as if they were running a
race down hill.”

In crossing from the east to the west side they passed an island shaped
like a bowl, the center filled with water, and a broad green brim.
M’Gregor’s landing is a small busy town of one long street, there being
no place for another in the narrow ravine. The street was filled with
wagons, and many passengers landed to go out on the rich prairies of
Iowa, to which this ravine leads.

There is a noble view of the broad river and its wooded islands, in
crossing to _Prairie du Chien_ on the east side. Norman was amused at
seeing three dogs on this prairie, the first he had seen on the shores
of the river. The town derives its name from a family of Fox Indians,
who formerly lived there, and were known by the name of Dogs.

The fort, though now deserted, looked very finely with its white walls,
and its pleasant site, commanding the far reaches of the Mississippi,
and the prairie opening into the interior.

[Illustration:

  No. 666.

  PRAIRIE DU CHIEN.]

“Keokuk used to live here, Norman; do you remember the story you were
reading about him?”

“O yes, mother, he was such a brave man. He was chief of the Sacs and
Foxes, and yet he was such a firm friend to the whites that he exerted
all his influence to prevent his tribe from going to war with them. At
one time when the nation had determined upon a war with the United
States, he told them to burn their wigwams, kill their squaws, and then
to go into the enemy’s country to conquer or to die. This speech
convinced them of the folly of engaging in a war that could only
terminate in their ruin, and they followed his peaceful counsels.”

“And then,” asked Mrs. Lester, “how did he show his magnanimity when the
people were wearied with his goodness, as the Athenians of old were at
hearing Aristides called the Just?”

“O yes, that was at Prairie du Chien too. They chose a young man for
chief instead of the noble chief who so long had led them. He quietly
took the lower place, and introduced his youthful successor to the
United States agent, asking him to treat him as kindly as he had treated
Keokuk. This noble conduct showed the tribe their folly, and Keokuk was
soon restored to his place as their chief.”

“Poor Red Bird,” said Mrs. Lester, “this spot was a fatal one to him. He
was a real Indian hero; tall, lithe, and beautiful, graceful in
movement, skilled in feats of agility, daring and brave.”

“Why was this spot fatal to him?” asked Helen.

“He was a great friend to the whites,” replied Mrs. Lester, and dealt
kindly and truly with them. An Indian had been killed by a white man,
and his tribe demanded scalps to atone for this murder. Red Bird was
sent to obtain the scalp of the white man, but he returned, saying he
could find none.

Then came the cruel taunts of the revengeful savages; “Red Bird was no
brave;” “he feared the pale-faces;” “he cared not to avenge the blood of
one of their tribe.” “Red Bird must go again,” and this time not alone,
but accompanied by cruel Indians, to watch his movements. Poor Red Bird
had never met the pale-faces but with truth and kindness, and now a
hundred voices clamored for their destruction; and these voices
overpowered the still small voice within him.

Red Bird and his two companions entered a cabin, a little below Prairie
du Chien, at noon-day. It was a peaceful family group, fearing no evil.
The woman was washing near the window that looked toward the river; her
husband was seated by the cradle of his sleeping child, while an old
soldier sat near the door. The Indians asked for something to eat, and
as the woman gave them some bread and milk, she saw an expression in
their faces that led her to fly from the cabin to call for help. No help
could reach the ill-fated occupants of the cabin. The tomahawk of the
Indians rapidly descended; Red Bird scalped the husband and father, the
second Indian the soldier, while the fair hair of the infant was
dangling at the belt of the third savage, as he left the cabin.

“And what became of Red Bird?” asked Helen.

“He was taken by the United States officers, and brought to trial. Red
Bird, sad and stately, drew himself up to his full height, and said that
he had always been a friend of the white man, that he had never before
injured them, and that he had been forced to this act of retaliation by
the taunts of his tribe; that he thought they ought not to condemn him
for a single offense.”

[Illustration:

  No. 666.

  INDIANS KILLING A WHITE FAMILY.]

“He was put in irons, an indignity that so wrought upon his lofty
spirit, that he pined to death.”

“Look at that log-cabin on the bank,” said Norman; “perhaps that is the
one Keokuk slept in one night.”

“Why did he go there?” asked Helen.

“He came in and asked for a night’s lodging. The settler’s family, who
had seen many Indians about in the afternoon, were afraid; but the noble
countenance of their guest reassured them, and they gave him permission
to stay. In the morning he told them that his tribe were returning up
the river, after having received their money from the United States, and
that as some of them had drunk the firewater, he feared they might alarm
the pale-faces in the cabin, and therefore he had come to project them.”

Painted Rock, so called because there are Indian paintings upon it, was
on the opposite side of the river, in deep shadow, while the green hill
sloping toward the south, lay in broad sunshine.

Dwellings nestled in a pretty ravine were frowned upon by four lofty
cliffs, whose rugged rocks resembled fortifications. One rock looked
precisely like the fragment of a massive wall. Just beyond, a valley,
branching in three directions, ran up among the hills. Over one of
these, to the south, the dark shadow of the bluff was thrown, while the
soft rounded hills to the north were covered with scattered trees,
resembling orchards on the hillside, giving a cultivated look to the
scene.

No docks are needed, as the steamer, that only draws about eighteen
inches of water, runs up anywhere close to the shore. As it was
approaching the bank they saw a log-cabin, in the door of which stood a
man, and a little child in red frock and white pantalets, making a
pretty picture.

On the jutting point where the boat touched was a white house, and a
young girl, with an earthen pitcher, was walking down the stone steps
leading to the water.

A great yellow Egyptian-looking cliff threw a shadow over this peaceful
scene.

“There are the nine passengers who are to land at this place,” exclaimed
Norman, as a man walked up the road followed by eight sheep. “He has
been surrounded by that family ever since we left Dunleith.”

“He looks very well satisfied now to have them all safely landed,” said
Helen Lisle; “how pleased his children will be at the grand arrival.”

The bluffs were now magnificent. The limestone strata extended in
straight lines, looking like streets; then a bold red bluff towered up
like a great cathedral; then a building resembling the New York Free
Academy, while lofty masses of rock, crowned and encircled with verdure,
continually remind one of the feudal castles of the Rhine. It was with
reluctance they obeyed the summons to tea, which withdrew them from the
ruddy cliffs of Wisconsin; but on returning to the deck they saw them
still, glowing in the light of the setting sun:

                 “Each rosy peak, each flinting spire,
                 Was bathed in floods of living fire;
                 Their rocky summits, split and rent,
                 Form’d turret, dome, or battlement;
                 Or seem’d fantastically set,
                 With cupola or minaret.”

There is the mouth of the Upper Iowa River, on the boundary line of Iowa
and Minnesota. “Good-by, Iowa,” said Norman, taking off his hat and
waving it to the receding state.

“Crossing the river again,” said Mrs. Lester. “We will soon be at the
mouth of the Bad Axe River, but the light is fading so rapidly that we
will not be able to see the spot of the decisive conflict between the
Indian and white man.”

“I never heard of that battle mother, will you tell me something about
it?”

“It was at the close of the Black Hawk war, in 1832. The Indians were
entirely defeated by the United States troops at this place. A number of
squaws were slain in the wild confusion of battle, not being
distinguished from the Indians in the long grass into which they had
fled for refuge. One poor woman, as she received her mortal wound,
clasped her child close to her bosom, and fell over upon it, thus
pinioning it to the ground. The poor little thing was found the next day
under the lifeless body of its mother. Its arm was broken, and the child
was so starved that, even during the painful operation of setting the
broken bone, it eagerly devoured some meat given to it by the
compassionate soldier who had rescued it from the arms now powerless for
its protection. The love of another mother bore her safely over the deep
waters. She placed her papoose in her blanket, and holding it between
her teeth, she swam across the broad river, and reached the opposite
shore in safety.”




                              CHAPTER VII.
                    SECOND DAY UPON THE MISSISSIPPI.

                   “It seems to float ever, forever,
                   Upon that many winding river,
                   Between mountains, woods, abysses,
                   A paradise of wildernesses.”


“It must have been a proud moment for De Soto when he first looked upon
the lower waters of this magnificent river,” said Mrs. Lester, as she
sat with Norman on the guards of the boat the next morning; “what a
scene it must have been; the canoes of the Indians floating on the
waters, while on the banks hundreds of the red men, with white feathers
waving o’er their brows, were gazing with wonder at their new visitors.

“And when he and his followers had crossed the bank, and the Indians
knelt to the white chief, whom they thought was one of the children of
the sun, to ask him for life for the dying, he told them to pray to God,
who alone could help them.

“Soon in this dreary western wilderness the princely De Soto breathed
his last. His people, fearing to let the Indians know of his death,
wrapped up his body, and buried it beneath the waters of the great river
he had discovered; while, for the first time, a Christian requiem,
softly chanted in the darkness, mingled with the music of its winds and
waves.”[1]

Footnote 1:

  De Soto never saw the Upper Mississippi. He ascended the Lower
  Mississippi as far as the Missouri. He died and was buried somewhere
  near the mouth of the Arkansas River.—ED.

“And so,” said Norman, “the mighty river is a memorial of him. How much
I would like to have seen birch-canoes floating on the river. And I do
believe there is one made fast to the shore just by that ‘dug-out.’”

“What an ugly word ‘dug-out’ is; so different from the birch canoe,”
said Mrs. Lester.

“But, mother, it just tells what it is; a trunk of a tree, hollowed or
dug out in the shape of a boat. But see how pretty that bark canoe is!
Don’t you remember we were reading about it in Hiawatha; how he girdled
the birch-tree just above its roots, and just below its lower branches,
then cut it from top to bottom, and stripped it, unbroken, from the tree
with a wooden wedge?”

“Well, what did he do then?”

“He made a framework of cedar-boughs, like two bended bows, and then he
sewed the bark together with the roots of the larch-tree; bound it to
the framework, and stopped up all the seams and crevices with resin from
the fir-tree. And then he embroidered it with porcupine quills.”

“You remember pretty well how the canoe was made, Norman. I wish you
could recall some of those lines about the birch canoe you were so fond
of repeating.”

“I think I can, mother,” said Norman; “at any rate I will repeat what I
remember:”

                  “Thus the birch canoe was builded
                  In the valley, by the river,
                  In the bosom of the forest;
                  And the forest’s life was in it,
                  All its mystery, and its magic,
                  All the lightness of the birch-tree,
                  All the toughness of the cedar,
                  All the larch’s supple sinews;
                  And it floated on the river
                  Like a yellow leaf in autumn,
                  Like a yellow water-lily.”

“I am very glad that I have seen a birch canoe; but I would like to see
some Indians in it; not an Indian have I seen on the banks of this
river. Now we are going to take in wood. I wish I could go on shore.”

It did, indeed, look most inviting, that piece of woodland, with its
high umbrageous roof, and deep dark recesses; and many of the gentlemen
went on shore to gather flowers and cut sticks for canes; one of these
was handed to Norman as a remembrance of the woods of Minnesota.

The bank was bordered with two long wood-piles; and one of the officers
of the boat measured the height and length of a section; and, at a word,
twelve stout Irishmen sprung on shore, and seizing each his half dozen
sticks, trotted on board. Rapid as were their movements, it was a long
time before the great wood-pile was transferred to the deck of the
steamer, but it was pleasant to enjoy the fragrance of the forest and
the sweet songs of its birds.

About mid-day they entered Lake Pepin, an expansion of the river
twenty-four miles long, and from two to four miles wide. It is a
beautiful sheet of water, with high rocky bluffs on the eastern, and
rounded wooded hills on the western bank, while it is bordered with a
broad beach of white gravel. A fresh breeze crossed its waters, almost
rising into a stiff gale. Sudden gales of wind are not uncommon on this
lake, often obliging steamers to lay to until their violence is over.

On the western shore is the celebrated Maiden’s Rock, a bold,
precipitous bluff, rising four hundred feet above the lake. All eyes
were turned toward its towering height. Its story is one of great
beauty.

A maiden of the Sioux had given her heart to a chief of her own tribe,
who had sought her love. The parents, however, would not consent to her
alliance with the young brave, but insisted on her marrying an old
chief, of great wisdom and influence in the nation. The marriage-day was
fixed, and Oola-Ita, with other Indian maidens, was gathering berries on
the brow of this cliff for the wedding-feast. Suddenly a plaintive song
rose on the sea, and they saw the beautiful Oola-Ita poised gracefully
on the very edge of the precipice, her head upraised, and her long hair
floating in the wind, as she warbled her parting song. In a moment,
before a friendly hand could arrest her, she leaped from the precipice,
and was dashed to pieces on the rocks below.

[Illustration:

  No. 666.

  MAIDEN’S ROCK.]

Six miles above Lake Pepin is the town of Red Wing, finely situated on
the river bank, beneath the shadow of a towering bluff. There was
formerly the village of Talangamane, or the Red Wing, esteemed the first
chief of his nation. The university which bears Bishop Hamline’s name,
and which has been founded by his liberal gift, may be seen from the
water, and near it is a large Methodist church.

Two weeks after a terrible accident happened at this town. The steamer
Galena took fire. The pilot manfully kept his place at the wheel; amid
the scorching flames he brought the boat to the shore, and kept her
there till the passengers had escaped. A mother and three children were
lost, but the rest stood in their night-clothes on the shore; some of
them stripped of the means which were to provide them with a home in the
new country to which they were going, but thankful for lives saved from
flood and flame.

The presiding elder of the district came on board at Red Wing. He was
introduced to Mrs. Lester by a Baptist minister, who was returning to
St. Paul with his bride. He had been in the country for twelve years,
and his varied knowledge made him a most agreeable companion. He had
been brought in familiar contact with the Indians and with the settlers;
he could tell of the wigwam, and the log cabin, and the thriving towns
now replacing them; he knew the character of the strata of the river
bank and the names of the trees in the forest. He had visited an Indian
mission four hundred miles above the Falls of St. Anthony; had ascended
part of it in a canoe carried over the portage past the rapids, by
half-breeds. A most quiet, domestic river it is above St. Anthony,
flowing through beautiful prairies covered with grapes and wild flowers,
diversified with gentle hills and groves of oak. These prairies were
formerly the resort of herds of buffaloes and deer; wolves, too, roamed
over them, and just before dawn might be heard the hideous cry of the
great white owl. Abundance of water-fowl used to be seen here; ducks,
geese, pelicans, swans, and snipe; while the hawk, buzzard, and eagle
sailed on lofty wing in the regions of upper air.

The waters of the St. Croix River looked blue and beautiful as they
flowed from the lovely lake at its mouth into the more turbid waters of
the Mississippi, with which they refuse for some time to mingle, the
currents of different hues running side by side. Magnificent forests,
huge trees (primeval) of stately trunk and deep rich foliage, adorn the
shores of the river, or the large islands in its broad bosom.

Norman saw three wigwams on one of these islands, and two Indian boys
seated on the shore. Not very far from this was formerly a Sioux village
of _Le Petit Corbeau_, or the Little Raven. An anecdote is told of this
Indian chief, which very finely illustrates the Saviour’s precept: “If
any man take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also.”

The Little Raven, going one morning to examine his beaver-trap, found a
_sauteur_ in the act of stealing it. The thief, looking up, saw the
chief of a nation with which his own was at war, standing looking at him
with a loaded rifle in his hands. The culprit expected instant death.
How great then was his astonishment when the Sioux chief, approaching
him, said: “Be not alarmed, I come to present you the trap, of which I
see you stand in need. You are entirely welcome to it. Take my gun also,
as I perceive you have none of your own, and depart with it to the land
of your countrymen; but linger not here, lest some of my young men, who
are panting for the blood of their enemies, should discover your
footsteps in our country, and should fall upon you.” So saying, he gave
him his gun and his accoutrements, and returned unarmed to his village.

One would think that this Indian chief must have heard and received the
sublime words of the apostle:

“Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto
wrath: for it is written, ‘Vengeance is mine; I will repay,’ saith the
Lord; therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him
drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head. Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.”




                             CHAPTER VIII.
                     OWAH-MENAH, THE FALLING WATER.

                  “In the land of the Dacotahs,
                  Where the Falls of Minnehaha,
                  Flash and gleam among the oak-trees,
                  Laugh and leap into the valley.”


St. Paul, “the diadem city of the northwest,” situated on high bluffs,
at a bend of the river, looked very imposing in the light of a glowing
sunset. The noisy cries of the hackmen and runners for the different
hotels filled the air as the boat touched the wharf. Fourteen of the
passengers took the stage for St. Anthony’s Falls. Norman was seated on
the top of the stage-coach. The glimmering twilight and the pale
moonlight were not, however, very favorable for distant views of a new
country. Companies of emigrants had pitched their tents and kindled
their fire to cook their evening meal. The light played upon the faces
of parents and children grouped around the fire, and fell upon the white
cover of the prairie wagons, near which the horses were tied.

There were glimpses of the Mississippi, of a large hotel and a high
observatory; and exclamations from sleepy children at the great
musquetos lighting upon their faces in the darkness. There was a sound
of waters in the air, and a great building loomed up in the dim light,
and they were at the Winslow House. Great halls, large parlors richly
furnished, and bed-rooms with velvet carpets and luxuriously stuffed
chairs. Very grand for the northwest. It was past eleven o’clock, and
the wearied travelers were glad to seek repose.

At four o’clock in the morning Mrs. Lester was awakened by a knock at
her door. It was from an untiring fellow-traveler, who wished to see all
that was to be seen in time to return to the Grey Eagle at ten. Mrs.
Lester thanked her, but said she could not get ready in time, and from
her window she watched the lady, her brother, and her niece on their way
to the falls and the bridge. Sightseeing seemed particularly
unattractive in that grey morning twilight that clothes the landscape
with a more sober livery than that of evening.

After some ineffectual attempts to arouse Norman, Mrs. Lester went to
the observatory, at the top of the great hotel, to see the sun rise. It
was a noble view; the town of St. Anthony immediately beneath the eye;
the Mississippi, with its falls, suspension bridge, and wooded island
above, and the rocky chasm below; Minneapolis, with its spires and fine
hotels, on the opposite side of the river, and the boundless prairie
meeting the sky in that encircling horizon.

[Illustration:

  No. 666.

  FALLS OF ST. ANTHONY.]

At length Norman was awakened, and after sundry calls from his mother to
hasten his movements, he sallied forth with her for a walk. Walking down
the street for some distance, they crossed a little bridge leading past
a large stone mill, and after scrambling over a stony path, they came to
the edge of the river and in view of the falls. Norman’s disappointment
was great. “Why, mother,” said he, “have we come all this distance to
see these falls?”

In truth they were not very imposing. The stream above was filled with
logs, floated down to be sawed in the mill, and many of them were lodged
above and below the fall, while a shingle-machine was built in the
center. Man’s work had taken away all the wild grace of nature.

The fall is only seventeen feet high, but the whole scene looks finely
from the bridge below, and from the Minneapolis side, whence it was seen
by the party that set out on their rambles at four o’clock in the
morning.

It was a very warm morning, but near the river the air was cool and
refreshing, and Norman gathered wild roses and rose-buds in all their
dewy freshness. The charm of early birds, too, was not wanting at
_Owah-Menah_, the musical Indian name, changed by Father Hennepin, a
French missionary, who visited this spot in 1680, to St. Anthony’s
Falls.

As the falls of a mighty river, they are worth seeing; and they are at
the point of transition from the prairies of the Upper Mississippi, to
the rugged limestone bluffs below; oaks growing above, and cedars and
pines below.

On their way to the hotel Norman gathered some purple flowers growing in
great profusion, while his mother wandered to the suspension bridge so
gracefully thrown over the river, looked at the pretty wooded island,
and at the mass of drift logs collected in the boom.

After a nice and beautifully served breakfast, Norman and his mother got
into a carriage to return to St. Paul and the Grey Eagle. They would
have liked to spend the day at St. Paul, but Mrs. Lester was anxious to
return home, as she thought she would be able to do, before the Sabbath.
They crossed the suspension bridge, drove through Minneapolis, called to
say good-by to Mrs. Lisle and the children, who had added so much to the
pleasure of their river travel, and then rapidly over the broad prairie.

Their attention was attracted by a lonely tomb, deeply shaded with
trees, on the banks of the Minnehaha, and the driver told them that it
was the tomb of the young wife and child of an officer of the army, who,
when stationed at Fort Snelling, buried his beloved ones on the banks of
this romantic stream.

The driver stopped; they were on the prairie, with nothing to excite
expectation.

                     “The falls of Minnehaha[2]
                   Did not call them from a distance;
                   Did not cry to them afar off.”

Footnote 2:

  See Frontispiece.

Then getting out of the carriage, and descending a narrow path, the fall
was before them, perfectly satisfying in its beauty; a gem of a fall, at
once stamping its image on the memory; “a thing of beauty” to be “a joy
forever.”

The fall is sixty feet high, and makes one graceful leap over an
amphitheater of rock, that recedes far enough to enable one to walk
round behind the fall, beneath the overhanging cliff. One large tree
grew on the steep bank on which they stood, sufficiently near to make a
fine foreground to the picture, and throw its masses of foliage across
the fall. There was nothing to mar the perfect loveliness of the scene.
A stir in the branches of the great tree against which Norman leaned
induced him to look up, and there, upon the bough,

                             “With tail erected
                   Sat the squirel, Adjidanmo;
                   In his fur the breeze of morning
                   Play’d as in the prairie grasses.”

Norman watched him leap surely from branch to branch, over the deep
abyss below, and then gathered some pretty flowers within reach, and
asked the guide to gather some graceful hare-bells that hung over the
steep cliff.

Another look from the head of the falls, and a few more flowers
gathered, which they pressed, together with the rose-buds from
Owah-Menah, and they got into the carriage.

Soon they reached Fort Snelling, in which Norman was very much
interested. They drove round the deserted barracks, no longer astir with
“the pomp and circumstance of war.” Norman would have enjoyed seeing the
sentinel on duty and the soldiers on parade. His mother thought of the
lonely lives the officers and their families must have led on that
frontier post, far, far as it then was from the center of civilized
life.

The fort commands a noble view, placed as it is on a commanding bluff at
the junction of the Mississippi and the St. Peters rivers. The valley of
the St. Peters, sloping upward, with its sunny fields, its aromatic
grasses, and noble groves, stretches onward in its beauty as far as the
eye can reach. In this valley is found the fine red stone of which the
Indians make the bowls of their pipes; the red paint the Sioux use so
much, and the blue and green clay used in painting, are also found here.
This lovely valley had recently been the scene of a bloody battle
between the Sioux and Chippewas, and the driver told Norman that he had
seen some of wounded Indians carried through St. Anthony by some of
their tribe.

From the earliest times these two nations have been at war; a feud
transmitted from generation to generation.

How few of these Indians have learned the great lessons of loving
kindness which the white men ought to have taught them. Steadily
retreating from their broad prairies, their great lakes and rivers,
before the advancing tread of the white man, they have not, as they gave
up their beautiful homes, got a title to a grander and more glorious
inheritance in the spirit land. How many have received firewater and
fire-arms, at the hand of the white man! how few have taken from him the
cup of salvation! Some of the customs of the Sioux seem to indicate that
they have come from Asia, across the narrow straits that divide the two
continents. They offer sacrifices and prayers to an unknown God; they
have feasts of thanksgiving after deliverance from danger; they offer
meat and burnt-offerings; they burn incense. These customs, together
with their peculiar countenances and utterances, their own traditions,
and the testimony of other nations, have convinced careful observers
that they are descendants of a race of Asiatics.[3]

Footnote 3:

  Pike’s Expedition.

The road winds around the hill on which the fort is built, and Norman
saw many swallows flying into nests excavated in the banks of white
sand-stone.

Crossing the river by a rope ferry, they ascended the opposite bank, and
drove rapidly onward till they stopped to visit Carver’s Cave.

There are several large rooms rounded in the white sand-stone, which
crumbles at the touch. The floor was of pure white fine sand, powdered,
while through the cave flowed a stream clear as crystal. Norman stooped
and drank freely of the cool refreshing water. He was delighted. “How
beautiful these arched walls are,” he exclaimed; “how curious to have
such rooms hollowed out of the earth.”

There were other apartments to be reached, through a narrow passage, but
the driver had no torch with him, and it was not advisable to venture in
the darkness. Norman broke off a piece of the sand-stone as a memorial
of the cave, and then hastened to the carriage.

Over the prairie, with its abundant blossoms; along the high bluffs upon
which St. Paul is built; through a long busy street; a pause at the door
of a gentleman whom Mrs. Lester had known in her old home in the East,
and they were once more on the Grey Eagle.

And there was the lady whom they had left at the Winslow House, just
getting out of the stage. Her face brightened as she heard of Fort
Snelling, the lovely Minnehaha, and Carver’s Cave; but then she had had
a very satisfactory view of St. Anthony’s Falls, and had been able to
verify, in the truth-telling daylight, the vague and indistinct
impressions of a moonlight drive.




                              CHAPTER IX.
                         DOWN THE MISSISSIPPI.

          Thus our idle fancies shaped themselves that day,
          Mid the bluffs, and headlands, and the islets gray,
          As we travel’d southward in our gallant ship,
          Floating, drifting, dreaming down the Mississippi.

                                                    MACKAY.


The gentleman whom Mrs. Lester had called to see, and who was out
driving at the time, came to the boat to see her, and promised her many
lovely drives if she would prolong her visit. There were many things to
say of old friends and scenes, and he sat talking in the saloon till
Norman ran in to say that the boat had left the wharf. Good-by was
hurriedly said, and Mr. —— hastened to the captain to ask him to put him
ashore, as he was not prepared for a voyage down the Mississippi.

“That is the way,” said the captain; “people do not mind their own
business, and then I have to attend to it.”

He good-humoredly, however, gave the order to arrest the course of the
proud steamer, and direct its prow to the opposite shore. It was the
work of some minutes, for they are obliged, in stopping at a landing
going down stream, to turn the bow up the current.

“Well, captain,” said Mr. ——, as he sprang on shore, “I promise you to
go down twice in the Grey Eagle for this.”

There were some curious caves on the eastern bank of the river, walled
up and with windows in them. In one of these the owner keeps his
vegetables, as it is perfectly protected from the frost.

Going down the river was the going up reversed, and yet the same scenery
became new, seen under different aspects. The broad sunlight that now
lay on land and water was not so favorable to artistic effect as the
softened light and the lengthening shadows of the previous evening.

After dinner the Rev. Mr. Maynard asked Mrs. Lester to go into the bow
of the boat, where there was a cool breeze, most welcome in that sultry
summer day, and a fine view of the scenery. Norman would not go; he was
tired, and preferred reading in the saloon, where his mother left him.
Nearly an hour passed away, and as they were, approaching the St. Croix
River, Mrs. Lester said: “I must show Norman this beautiful sheet of
water; he did not see it when we went up.”

Through the long saloon she went, opened her state-room door, he was not
there; out on the guards, not there. She asked the stewardess, who had
not seen him since dinner. Breathless with agitation, Mrs. Lester rushed
upstairs to the hurricane-deck, meeting Mr. Maynard, who had come up the
opposite side to look in the pilot-house; the boy was not there! where
could he be?

Mr. Maynard had looked in the steerage, the barber’s shop; there was no
corner of the boat unvisited, and the terrible dread that he had fallen
overboard was settling down on his mother’s heart as she sank down on a
chair in the saloon, when the stewardess exclaimed, as she opened the
door of the state-room, “Here he is, asleep in the upper berth!” And
there he was, fast asleep, with two life-preservers, which he had tied
around him, and which his mother had mistaken for a gray comforter.

Norman, awakened, looked down with some wonder at the group at the door.
It was very hot; the sun’s fervent rays were shining upon the
state-room, and the life-preservers rather added to the heat, so that
Norman had had a pretty warm time. But he had made up by a sound sleep
for the late sitting up of the night before, and the early rising at St.
Anthony, and he was now quite ready to enjoy the afternoon.

Mr. Maynard, greatly relieved that Norman was found, pointed out his
house on the high bank of the river at Prescott, and then said good-by,
as he was going home.

Lake Pepin looked finely, with the “wavy curvature of its guardian
hills;” and again the Maiden’s Rock attracted all eyes. Lake City is
prettily situated beneath the bluffs on the western bank. A young girl,
who there came on the boat, told a sad story.

A few days before, a party of merry young people got into a boat, to
sail over to Maiden’s Rock. The party was planned to celebrate the
birthday of a young girl who, with her sister, and two friends, sisters,
on a visit to them, had just returned from school for their vacation.
Two young gentlemen and another young lady completed the party. The
morning was bright, and the sail charming. There was no cloud in the
sky, no shadow on that youthful group. They climbed the Maiden’s Rock,
gathered berries like those Indian maidens, and talked of the sad fate
of the chief’s daughter; little dreaming that in a few short hours the
fate of Oola-Ita was to be theirs, that they, too, were looking for the
last time on the waters of Lake Pepin!

On their return a sudden flaw of wind upset their boat in the middle of
the lake. The young men charged the young girls to hold fast to the boat
as it floated, upturned, in the water. They did so till, one by one,
their hands becoming numb and powerless, and their strength exhausted,
they sunk to rise no more! The long hair of one of the girls became
entangled around the button of the coat of one of the young men, and he
succeeded in lifting her up, and reaching the shore with her. The four
sisters were gone, and as the three survivors entered the town with
their heavy tidings, the friends of the two sisters visiting Lake City
drove in to take them home. Alas, they were already beyond the reach of
earthly help or love!

In a few days the bodies of these four young girls were found, two of
them far down at the other end of the lake. Every heart sympathized with
the bereaved parents, and while their house was left to them desolate,
the shadow of grief rested on the whole town.

A clear sunset and fading twilight gave place to the rising glories of
the queen of night.

About ten o’clock the boat stopped by the side of a forest to take in
wood. Pine fagots, lighted on the shore, cast a ruddy glow on the men,
who ran rapidly to and fro with their burden.

The moonlight slept peacefully on the waters, while from out of the
shadowy recesses of the grove a whippowill charmed the night into
silence. Rapid, clear, and distinct were those sweet sounds, as if he
wished to sing his song for the listening ears soon to be far away. He
seemed to have all the wood to himself, as he warbled his delicious
notes. In harmony were they with the still beauty of that summer night,
with the mystery of that woodland scene, and the quiet ripple of the
moonlit waters.

“Loud, and sudden, and near, the note of the whippowill sounded, like a
flute in the woods; and anon, through the neighboring thickets. Further
and further away it floated, and dropped into silence.”

Later in the night there was alarm and confusion on board. The steamer
Itasca, at a landing, ran into the Grey Eagle, breaking her
paddle-wheel. There was a crash, and for some time none knew the extent
of the injury received. The engines were stopped. The emigrants sleeping
on the deck, near the broken wheel, roused by the collision, were
transferred, with their sleeping children, to the other side, and
fruitless attempts were made to repair the injury. After a delay of two
hours the machinery was again set in motion, and the one paddle-wheel
had to do all the work. Happily Norman and his mother, who were on the
quiet side of the boat, slept through all the noise and confusion.




                               CHAPTER X.
                    FOURTH DAY UPON THE MISSISSIPPI.

      Safely led and guided by pilots who could tell
      The pulses of the river, its windings, and its swell;
      Who knew its closest secrets, by dark as well as light,
      Each bluff and ringing forest, each swamp or looming height.

                                                MACKAY.


Early in the morning Winona appeared, surrounded by its protecting
hills, reposing, as do most of those pretty towns, in the shadow of the
great bluffs, “like peace in the bosom of strength.”

The boat stopped for some time at La Crosse, a very nourishing town.
Here Mrs. Lester saw two Indians in blankets and leggings, a sight
Norman missed, to his great disappointment. He was at the other end of
the boat, too far off to be summoned in time.

The pilot, having just left his watch of six hours, came and invited
them to come up to the pilot-house in the afternoon. It was a welcome
invitation, for the day was very warm, and the pilot-house, with its
cool breeze, and its commanding view of the scenery, was a most
desirable place. Norman admired the handsome pilot as, with steadfast
eye and erect figure, he stood at the wheel, scanning the waters, and
guiding the vessel in the channel, winding round the islands, and from
one shore to the other of the great river. Turning the wheel, first to
the right, and then to the left, it seems very easy work, a very simple
operation; and yet what destinies depend upon those movements; fortune,
happiness, life, all involved! Hundreds of human beings pass days of
enjoyment and nights of quiet rest because they have faith in their
pilot.

And there are men who, as they guide the pen, or utter calm, truthful
words, or pray in the deep of their hearts, seem to be doing very
little, and yet those pen traces, those simple words, those earnest
prayers, may guide hundreds in the perilous voyage of life, may direct
their course away from the shoals and snags that threaten destruction,
and float them safely to their desired haven.

Norman was greatly mortified at the disabled state of the Grey Eagle,
one wing broken, how could she maintain her triumphant flight? Others
accustomed to yield the palm, now passed her with ease.

“I hope they know that her paddle-wheel is broken,” said Norman; “just
look at those boats; what efforts they are making to pass us!”

Norman watched the boats with great interest, as they put on more steam,
and darted past the Grey Eagle, making the landings before her, and
carrying off the waiting passengers.

The view, crossing the river from Prairie du Chien, overlooking the
islands as they now could from their elevated position, was extremely
fine.

The Northern Light and the Grey Eagle met at M’Gregor’s Landing, and the
captain of the latter was telling the captain of the former about his
broken paddle-wheel and his consequently tardy progress.

“There is a lady trying to speak to you,” said the pilot. On the
Northern Light was Mrs. Ralston, with whom Mrs. Lester had intended to
journey to St. Paul. Handkerchiefs were waved and mute signals
attempted, but the few desired words of explanation were wanting. Near
and yet afar off. The boats soon parted for their opposite points of
destination, and Mr. and Mrs. Ralston, from the hurricane deck, waved
their good-by. Nearly opposite M’Gregor’s landing is the mouth of the
Wisconsin River.

“There was a memorable voyage on that river nearly two hundred years
ago,” said Mrs. Lester. “Two canoes, containing seven men, floated down
these waters, ‘entering happily this great river with a joy that could
not be expressed.’”

“Who were they, mother?”

“Father Marquette, the gentle, good missionary; Joliet, a citizen of
Quebec, and five Frenchmen, their companions. They had left the Fox
River, which flows into Green Bay, and carrying their canoes, they
crossed the narrow portage that divides it from the Wisconsin on the
10th of June, 1673. Down the river for seven days, floating in those
majestic solitudes, seeing neither man nor beast, passing beautiful
prairies, and green hillsides, the discoverers at length reached the
great river which they were seeking to find.

“And where did they go then?” asked Norman. “Over these waters the light
birch bark canoes floated for about sixty leagues. Then they landed on
the western bank of the river, where they saw foot-prints on the shore.
They followed them till they came in sight of an Indian village.

“They commended themselves to God, and cried aloud. Four old men
advanced to meet them, bearing the calumet, the peace-pipe, adorned with
brilliant feathers, and saying, “We are Illinois,” which means, “We are
men.” The Indians invited the strangers to their village, prepared a
feast in their honor, and entertained them for six days. Several hundred
warriors then escorted them to their canoes, hanging around the neck of
Marquette, on parting, the calumet, with its plumage of various hues, a
pledge of safety for the wanderers among savage tribes.”

“Do go on, mother, and tell me something more about Marquette. I think
his adventures are very interesting.”

“I know little more about him, except that he sailed down the river past
the Missouri and the Ohio, and that some warlike Indians, armed with
clubs, axes, bows and arrows, came out to meet them with the fearful
war-whoop. Marquette stood up, holding the sacred peace-pipe, and God
touched the hearts of the Indians, so that at the sight of this symbol
they threw their bows and arrows into the canoes, and welcomed the
strangers.

“On their return they sailed up the river Illinois, through the
beautiful prairies. The tribe of Illinois that live on its banks wanted
the good missionary to remain with them, and one of their chiefs, with
his young men, led the party to Lake Michigan, by way of Chicago. Here
Marquette remained to preach to the Miamis north of Chicago, and Joliet
returned to Quebec, to announce the discovery of the upper Mississippi.

“And what became of the good Marquette?”

“Two years afterward, as he was going to Mackinaw, he entered a little
river in Michigan, which, for a long time afterward, was called by his
name. He requested the men who paddled his canoe to carry him ashore.
They did so; and there, with no shelter but the little bark cabin which
his men hastily erected, he endured great agony. But he seems to have
had faith in Christ, and died in great peace. In the gloom of the vast
forests he slept to wake again in the green solitudes of the New World.
His companions dug his grave on a rising ground near the river, and
buried his body, which was afterward taken up by the Indians, and
carried with great respect to old Mackinaw, and placed in a little vault
of a Catholic church, which has long since disappeared.”

The scenery that on their upward course was vailed in mist and drizzling
rain, was now seen in its “fairest, happiest attitude.” Nothing was
wanting to “the gentle grace” of that parting day. Purple, crimson, and
gold painted the western sky, as the sun sank slowly below the horizon,
lighting up a fairy scene on the placid waters of the river. Then, as
the onward motion of the boat rudely disturbed the sleeping glory, new
combinations of beauty sought to make amends for the loss of the serene
picture of the radiant heavens. Golden ripples, a honeycomb of black and
gold, lay between them and the wooded banks toward which, as the
gorgeous tints now faded on earth and sky, Norman directed his
attention.

Rocks, decayed trees and branches covered with moss and lichen, were
faithfully mirrored in the waters, giving a kaleidescopic effect to
every object. Norman saw, simultaneously with his mother, exquisitely
tinted butterflies, insects of green and gray, stone altars, rustic
letters, and many other objects. Exclamations of wonder and admiration
were echoed from one to the other at some of these marvelous
combinations; and it was with reluctance they turned, as the twilight
deepened, from the margin of the woodland to the clear outline of the
trees against the western sky. There was still room for fancy to sketch
her pictures, and call up birds and beasts in that varied outline.

“This is the pleasantest afternoon of all,” cried Norman; “it is so nice
for us to be by ourselves.”

“And yet you forsook me first, Norman, and, absorbed in your play, lost
the first views of the Mississippi. You said there was a want with
children which children alone could supply—a demand of the social
nature.”

“I know it, mother; I know that I said so, and I enjoyed those merry
games very much; but after all this has been the happiest time.”




                              CHAPTER XI.
                          A SUNDAY IN DUBUQUE.

              “O day most calm, most bright,
                The fruit of this, the next world’s bud;
              The indorsement of supreme delight,
                Writ by a Friend and with his blood;
              The couch of time; care’s balm and bay;
              The week were dark, but for thy light:
                Thy torch doth show the way.”

                                          GEORGE HERBERT.


A very pleasant room at the Julien House afforded a welcome retreat on
the Sabbath. It was intensely hot; the burning rays of the sun were
reflected from the towering bluffs that shield the town from the west
wind. A walk of a mile and a half through the main street led them to
the Methodist church, where the services were very animating and
delightful.

A cordial greeting from the minister, who had known Mrs. Lester in the
East, was followed by a kind invitation to the parsonage, next door to
the church. There was a beautiful bunch of flowers on the table,
gathered on the prairies the day before. One, the moccasin flower, a
large yellow flower, with a sort of pouch like a gigantic calceolaria,
Norman had never seen before, and he was very much pleased when a number
of them were given to him.

Several churches to which Mrs. Lester went in the afternoon were closed,
so she continued her walk to the same church, where she heard a very
good sermon from the Presbyterian minister, to whose congregation the
use of the Methodist church was given while their own was being
repaired.

The street she took on her return home led her nearer to the bluff, up
which people were creeping to get some cool air in the oppressive
stillness of that summer afternoon. Every door was open, and quiet
pleasant interiors were revealed to the passer-by; family groups, seated
on the porch or in the parlor, reading or taking their tea.

Toward evening, as he was sitting on the window, Norman saw a number of
people flocking to the Levee, and he asked his mother’s permission to
follow them, and ascertain what had happened. He soon returned, looking
very grave and downcast. He had been in the presence of death. A young
man of nineteen had been drowned the evening before, seized with sudden
cramps while bathing, and they had just found his body. There it lay,
floating on the water, the head downward, the limbs drawn up; and in the
solemn presence of death light and careless words had been spoken that
shocked Norman, touched as he was by the unfamiliar sight. The drowned
lad was French, an orphan and a stranger in the land, with no one to
miss him or mourn for him, save one loving heart, that of a sister, left
alone without kindred or friends. Later in the evening the vehicle
containing the body stopped at a confectioner’s, on the opposite side of
the street, and the young man was carried in to the room he had left the
evening before, in the fullness of life and health.

                 “Death enters and there’s no defense;
                   His time there’s none can tell;
                 He’ll in a moment bear thee hence,
                   To heaven, or down to hell.”

Well is it in this life of uncertainty, when the happiest moments may be
darkened by the presence of this grim visitor, to be prepared for his
coming; to have our fear of him taken away; to be able to look upon him
as the messenger sent to call us to our Father’s house.

“In the midst of life we are in death: to whom then, O Lord, can we turn
but unto thee!”




                              CHAPTER XII.
                            DOWN THE RIVER.

             Down the river went they
             In and out among its islands,
             Sailed through all its bends and windings,
             Sailed through all its deeps and shallows.

                                                 HIAWATHA.


The morning came bright and warm as ever.

At the boat Norman was delighted to see his friend, the pilot of the
Grey Eagle, who introduced them to Captain Gray, of the Kate Cassel.
There he saw too the lady who brought with her memories of the early
dawn at St. Anthony. “You like to see everything that is to be seen,”
she said to Mrs. Lester; “under that bare spot you see on the bluff
south of the town is the grave of Dubuque, the Indian chief who once
owned all this land.”

“Mother,” said Norman, as their kindly informant left them, “Dubuque is
a very strange name for an Indian chief to have; he must have been named
by the French when he was a child.”

“Julien Dubuque,” replied his mother, “was not an Indian, but a
Frenchman, who bought all this valuable mining region, so rich in fine
lead ore, from the Indians, in 1788. They had been discovered two years
before by the wife of Peosta, an Indian warrior. Dubuque died in 1810.
The Julien House is named, I suppose, in his honor.”

For a hot and weary hour the deck hands were busy taking on freight:
first barrels from a warehouse on the Levee at Dubuque; then at
Dunleith, a number of reapers and mowers, very heavy and cumbersome to
be moved.

As soon as the boat was in motion Captain Gray asked Mrs. Lester if she
would go to the pilot-house, as that was the coolest part of the boat.
Very kindly he escorted her thither across the hurricane-deck. It was a
delightful change from the heated atmosphere below to the cool
refreshing breezes above.

“Two eagles at once,” said the captain. “There is something for you to
look at, my boy.”

There was the Grey Eagle, her paddles both in motion, and the War Eagle
following her in her northward course; a great sight for Norman.

The banks are well wooded, and of some elevation, and there are pretty
islands; but the scenery is more monotonous and not so grand as that of
the Upper Mississippi. The river is much more shallow, and can be
navigated only by a smaller class of steamboats.

The captain pointed out to them, on the banks of the river, the entrance
to a lead mine, and a hill-top called Pilot Knob.

At two o’clock they approached Fulton, and the captain courteously took
them on shore.

Fulton, the terminus of an air-line road from Chicago, is rather an
uninviting looking place, with a grand hotel, suitable for a great city;
a destiny Fulton does not seem likely to achieve.

Seated in the cars, Norman saw the sun set for the last time on the
great river that had become to him a familiar friend; saw the Rock River
gleam in the moonlight; and soon after the welcome lights of his uncle’s
home.

Norman had a great deal to tell his uncle and aunt about the
Mississippi, and Minnehaha, and the boats, and the little incidents of
their journey, and the week he was to spend at Dixon passed rapidly
away.

One day Norman’s aunt took Mrs. Lester to see Father Dixon, the
patriarch of the place to which his name is given. The hotel also bears
the name given to him by the Indians, Nachusah, or the White Haired. His
long flowing white hair makes him look very venerable; and there is an
expression of gentleness in his delicate features that wins the love of
the children of the town, who all call him Grandpapa. He established a
ferry over the Rock River thirty years ago, when there were no white
people in all the country round, and lived here in his solitary dwelling
by the river side.

He lives there still; and Mrs. Lester was very much interested in her
visit to him, and in his accounts of the Indians who formerly roamed
over these prairies, now the fruitful farms of the white men.

One day a gentleman, who lived on the opposite side of the river, sent
his two carriages over for Norman’s uncle and aunt, his mother and
himself. As Norman was in the woods with Herbert Waldorf, they went
without him. The bridge had been carried away by the flood, so they
crossed by the rope ferry. A very stout wire rope was stretched across
the river, and a scow was fastened to this by a rope which slipped by a
wheel along the iron cable. When they drove on the scow, the man turned
the prow of the boat up the current, which at once urged the boat
onward. It is a very pleasant and rapid way of crossing the river,
allowing one to have a near look of the swiftly flowing waters.

Mr. Dexter had a pretty cottage and fifty acres of prairie land just on
the edge of the town. Mrs. Lester went up stairs to see the extensive
view of prairie from Ernest Dexter’s window, and then she looked at a
cabinet of fossils, most of which he had collected himself in Illinois.
There were some very fine specimens, and he was kind enough to give Mrs.
Lester a number of them.

The music of the piano called forth the rival notes of the mocking bird,
and, accompanied by several canaries, he made the air vocal with sweet
sounds. Mrs. Lester forgot what she was playing, so charmed was she with
these delicious songsters. Strawberries and ice-cream were fully
appreciated after the music, and the evening’s entertainment concluded
with a magnificent sunset on the prairie. Golden clouds were penciled
softly on the clear amber sky, while rugged wild clouds towered up in
stern contrast with this calm serenity. One could imagine the cliffs of
Sinai in those gray clouds, so bold and lofty, while through a torn rift
gleamed the soft blue sky. It was a memorable sunset even in the West,
where they claim for their sunsets a peculiar beauty.

Norman was very sorry when he heard how much he had missed, especially
as Mr. Dexter had been kind enough to send over twice for him. So he
told Harold Dexter, when he saw him at church the next day, that he
would walk over with Herbert Waldorf on Monday morning.

After breakfast Norman and Herbert walked over to Mr. Dexter’s, where
they found the boys waiting for them. After a careful survey of Ernest’s
treasury, and of a smaller cabinet belonging to Harold and his brother,
they set off, with baskets and hammers, in search of minerals. They went
to a quarry and found a very fine fossil, a portion of a petrified
snake. They hammered at this for a long time, but they broke it all to
pieces in endeavoring to get it out. Harold found, however, a large
stone filled with petrified shells, which he kindly gave to Norman, who
came home in the afternoon with his basket filled with pieces of rock.

One afternoon Norman saw three “prairie schooners” in the street before
his uncle’s door. These are the emigrant wagons with their white tops,
which look not unlike sails as you see them quietly moving on over the
far reaches of the prairie. A number of horses and boys were standing
near them. The party were hesitating as to their course; wishing to
cross the river, and seeing no bridge but the railroad bridge, they were
making their way to that, when they found they could not cross it. Hence
the halt and the consultation.

“Norman,” said his mother, “do go and find out where those emigrants are
going.”

“O mother,” said Norman, “I would not ask them for anything.”

“I will go then,” replied his mother, as she opened the garden gate, and
walked up to the last prairie wagon, in which a woman was seated with
her four children.

She seemed pleased to hear the accents of a friendly voice, and soon
told her simple story.

Eight years before she had been left a widow, with six children. The
boys of twelve and fourteen did not wish to learn a trade, and farming
was not very profitable in the part of Pennsylvania where she lived; so
she had come to seek, in the fertile fields of Iowa, bread for her
children. She had worked hard, and days of toil were still before her,
but there was more hope in that virgin soil of securing a competence.
The rich deep black loam of these prairies often, at its first sowing,
bears a golden harvest, that gives back to the farmer the amount he has
paid for the land, and the expense of its cultivation.

Mrs. Lester asked the emigrant, in whose patient face she had taken much
interest, if she had any friends in the new and strange country to which
she was going.

“O yes,” she replied; she had a married daughter there, and a church and
Sunday school for her children. She was a Methodist, as were the two
families with whom she was journeying; and she would have been unwilling
to go where her children would be deprived of their religious
privileges.

There were fifteen persons in the company. They had driven from
Pennsylvania to Cleveland, where they had taken the cars for Chicago.
The wagon was lifted on the car, the cover taken off, and the woman said
she had had the pleasantest ride she had ever taken in her life, looking
over the lake and the prairie from her elevated position. From Chicago
they had journeyed on, sometimes sleeping in their wagons, and sometimes
on the floor of some house opened for them. There were bright,
black-eyed children peeping from the recesses of the covered wagon, as
their mother was talking to Mrs. Lester, and one little girl sat
intently reading. Mrs. Lester bade her goodspeed, and the woman, with
brightened face, thanked her for her words of kindness and sympathy.

The last day of their stay in Dixon at length arrived, and with it came
Aunt Clara, whom Norman had never seen before, but whom he very soon
learned to love. She showed him his picture when a baby, which his
mother had sent her, and she found it difficult to trace any resemblance
to the tall boy before her.

Norman stayed with her and his uncle in the evening, while his mother
went out with a gentleman and lady to take a drive on the prairies. The
day had been very warm, but there was a cool breeze on those boundless
meadows that undulated peacefully, in their rounded swells, to the far
horizon. The corn was laughing in rich abundance, the wheat standing
thick on the fields, after the sun had set, leaving its luminous track
of light in wavy radiance; one huge cloud towered up in solitary
grandeur, its bold outline gilded by those parting rays.




                             CHAPTER XIII.
                              THE PICNIC.

                A joyful hour! anticipated keen,
                With zest of youthful appetite ...
                To spread that table in the wilderness;
                The spot selected with deliberate care,
                Fastidious from variety of choice,
                Where all was beautiful ...
                With joyous exultation, guests were led
                To our green banquet-room.

                                        CAROLINE BOWLES.


Norman was very sorry to part with his dear young friends, Alfred and
Herbert; but he was very glad that his Aunt and Uncle Lester, and his
Aunt Clara, were going with them, so that he had not to say good-by to
them. As he had traveled over this road when he came west, he had seen
these broad prairies before, but they were now enameled with brighter
hues. Great patches of purple phlox, a profusion of yellow flowers, and
bright red lilies, made all the broad expanse a vast flower-garden. His
Aunt Clara said that many of the prairie flowers were disappearing in
the progress of cultivation. The cattle that now covered the plains
destroyed them, and the plow rooted them up.

“Yes,” said his uncle to Norman, “your Aunt Clara sometimes fancies her
mission is to cultivate a blooming inclosure, in which she will preserve
all the prairie flowers from the extinction to which they are rapidly
tending.”

Geneva, which they soon reached, is a pretty town on the Fox River, and
the house of Henry’s aunt, whom they had come to visit, had a view of
the river and its wooded islands. Norman’s Aunt Clayton was very glad to
see him, and very kind to him, so that he was very happy with his new
relations. His aunt would bring him, several times a day, a great
tumbler of good rich milk, the like of which he had not often seen. She
sent for Willie Clayton to meet Norman, and the boys asked permission to
bathe in the river, Willie assuring Mrs. Lester that it was perfectly
safe. They were absent for a long time, and as neither of the boys could
swim, Mrs. Lester became very anxious as the dinner-hour approached, and
they had not yet returned. Mr. Clayton very kindly offered to go in
search of them, and while he was gone the boys made their appearance.
They did not know that they had been so long away; they had waded over
to the island, and the time slipped away more quickly than they thought.

After dinner Norman said his back was very much burned, exposed, as it
had been, to the fierce rays of the sun. His mother put some flour on
it, but after a while, it became so painful that he had to lie down on
the bed and have it covered with flour. His neck, and back, and arms
were all bright scarlet, and he suffered very much from the intense
burning.

The next day there was to be a school picnic in the grove, and Willie
was to speak on the occasion. Norman said it would be impossible for him
to dress himself; but when the animating strains of the band floated in
his window, as the procession marched to the grove, he thought he might
make the effort. His mother helped him to put on his clothes, as his
back was all blistered, and he walked with her and his aunt and uncle
rather soberly to the picnic.

The children were seated on benches under the trees, and a platform was
erected for the speakers. Norman was soon seated beside Willie, who was
also suffering from his sun-burned back. The band was stationed near
them, and between the recitations and declamations of the children,
“discoursed most excellent music.”

After a while the company were invited to partake of refreshments, and,
preceded by the band, they marched to another part of the grove, where
tables were tastefully arranged, covered with an abundance of good cake,
and ornamented with flowers.

Norman and Willie were in the front rank next to the rope that separated
the children from the tables; but the pressure from behind was rather
severe on their tender backs, so they came to where their mothers and
aunts were standing.

Mrs. Lester was happy to recognize in one of the young men most active
in providing for the wants of the children, one whom she had known in
her former beloved home in the East. Of his mother, who had been a near
neighbor, she retained a most kindly remembrance; and as she had been
suddenly and recently called to her home in the heavens, Mrs. Lester was
glad to learn that her son, left with his brother almost alone in the
world, was active in this western town in the Sabbath school and in the
temperance cause, maintaining a consistent religious character. A great
field for usefulness is opened in the West to Christian young men. So
many young men, in seeding their fortunes in these new and thriving
towns, throw off the restraining influence of their pious homes; absent
themselves from the house of God, and are thus easily led aside by a
thousand encircling temptations.

Exercises in geography, arithmetic, and declamation followed the feast,
some of which the band applauded in a very graceful manner. A number of
children gathered around the musicians, and one little boy, in a bright
red frock, stood leaning against his father, close by the great drum,
his eyes fixed on its great circumference, and his eyelids winking every
time it was struck.

After the exercises one of the ministers made a very good speech, in
which he told the children that if they wanted to rise above being mere
drudges at the dictation of others, they must study, they must work,
they must learn to think. What they did, they must do with their might;
when they played, they must play in earnest; and when they studied, they
must study in earnest; and that to be industrious and to be in earnest,
was the only way to be anything, or to do anything in the world.

He made the children laugh when he told them that in some parts of New
Hampshire the fields were so stony, that it was jocosely said that the
farmers sharpened their sheep’s noses that they might eat the grass
growing between the stones. This was a wonderful story for western
children, who never saw stones on their broad fertile prairies.

As the band played its farewell, the company left the ground greatly
pleased with the day’s entertainment.




                              CHAPTER XIV.
                           THE CAMP-MEETING.

               The holy sounds float up the dell
                 To fill my ravish’d ear,
               And now the glorious anthems swell
                 Of worshipers sincere;
               Of hearts bow’d in the dust that shed
                 Faith’s penitential tear.

                                             MOTHERWELL.


The next day Norman was to go with his mother and aunt to a
camp-meeting. It had rained the night before, and the clouds were
gathering in rather a threatening manner, obscuring the heavens, and
forming in dark masses at several points on the horizon. It was thought
not very prudent to go, but the strong desire in Mrs. Lester’s face
overpowered the cooler judgment of the others.

“If it does not rain,” said Mrs. Lester, “those clouds will certainly be
better than the broad glare of sunshine we have had for some days past.”

The carriage drove up to the door, and calling for some friends who
lived near, they were soon on their way. The drive was very pleasant
through the Fox valley, with frequent groves and pretty views of the
river. They drove into the pretty town of St. Charles, across its fine
bridge, with its noble piers, through the town on the east of the river,
and after a little while into the deep woods in which the camp-meeting
was held. The road through the woods was very bad: deep mud, and several
sloughs, called in the west _slews_. All these critical spots were
happily passed, and reaching the grove they got out of the carriage and
walked on the camp-ground.

The gentleman who accompanied them brought the carriage cushions to put
on the plank seats, which were rather damp with the heavy rains of the
night previous. There were ministers in the elevated covered stand,
appropriated to them, and a large congregation gathered for a
love-feast. It was pleasant to hear them speak of the happiness of
religion, to see the calm peace on their countenances, and to listen to
their expressions of love to their Saviour, of faith in him, and fixed
resolve to live to his service.

An intermission of a few minutes before the public service gave Norman
an opportunity of looking about him. About thirty tents were pitched in
a circle, and in the center of the amphitheater thus formed, seats were
arranged for the congregation beneath the shade of fine noble trees that
spread wide their branches. One, beneath which the preachers’ stand was
placed, threw itself toward the other trees, that bent as if to meet it,
making a most picturesque group. At each corner of the area there was a
structure formed of four stout sticks, about five feet high, on which
rested a platform covered with turf. On these rude candelabras, at dark,
they kindled pine knots, to give light to the evening meetings and to
the encampment. How much Norman would like to have seen this wild
woodland thus illuminated, the broad glare flashing on the gathered
groups.

An excellent sermon was preached on “Bear ye one another’s burdens, and
so fulfill the law of Christ;” and then a young minister, with the sweet
expression of whose face Norman had been struck, got up and made an
address full of beauty. It was enforcing the law of kindness. He said
that when they drove to the camp-ground the day before they had got into
a slough on the road, and there they were fast, the horses remaining
quiet after some ineffectual attempts to move forward. The driver, he
was glad to say, betrayed no impatience, and did not swear at the delay.
Soon another wagon drove up, and the driver, seeing the difficulty they
were in, at once unhitched his own horses and drew them out. And that
was what, he said, we ought to do when we saw people in trouble, draw
them out if we had the power. He then spoke of the harsh judgment we
often form of others, because they are deficient in some point upon
which we lay stress. “Now,” he continued, “these trees that bend over us
are not rounded and full on every side; some have their wealth of
branches on one side, and some on another. And so Christians seldom
present full symmetry of growth. One brother has a great deal of
patience and very weak faith; and one sister has faith almost strong
enough to remove mountains and very little patience. Now we should
rather contemplate the excellences of our Christian friends than their
deficiencies.”

He exhorted the people not to be like those trees that are slow to yield
their fruit, whose fruit, hard and green, required a vigorous shake to
loosen its hold. “Rather,” said he, “be like those generous trees, borne
down with their golden fruit, blessing the eye, and the touch, and the
taste of all around—trees of blessing, making glad the heritage of God.”
He spoke of words of kindness and sympathy, how often they cheered the
heart of the desolate, and brightened the path of the wayfarer. How
often those who were collecting for benevolent objects were more cheered
with the kind words of one who had no money to give, than with the large
gifts of another, grudgingly bestowed.

One word of counsel he gave, rather at variance with ordinary
exhortation. He charged his hearers to try not to be first, but to be
second. “In your plans and pleasures think of some one before yourself;
prefer the comfort of some friend to your own; sacrifice your own ease
to promote the well-being of another, and you will tread in the
footsteps of Him who pleased not himself.”

Norman saw the tears in his Aunt Lester’s eyes, as he turned to look at
her, and he thought that she had learned that lesson well, that she was
always thinking of other people, and preferring their comfort to her
own.

The hymn, swelled by the united voices of that large congregation,
filled the grove with its solemn harmony, and then the words of the
benediction fell like dew upon them.

Norman had never been to a camp-meeting before, and the scene had all
the charm of novelty to him. He saw the people preparing their meals in
the rear of their tents, the fire made of dry sticks on the grounds, and
the kettle hung on a cross stick, placed in the notches of two upright
ones. The tables were spread in the tents, and soon surrounded by family
groups. A lady, who knew Norman’s aunt, invited them to dinner, after
which they returned to their seats, when the bell was rung for the
afternoon service.

The sermon was a good one, on “Gather up the fragments that remain, that
nothing may be lost.”

Norman did not remember much of the sermon; but one fact, given by the
minister who rose to exhort, made a great impression upon him.

“At a time of great religious interest,” said he, “when many persons,
awakened to a sense of their danger, were inquiring what they should do
to be saved, I spoke to three boys, and asked them if they could not, by
personal effort, lead some of their companions to the Saviour. One of
the boys, a tall and thoughtful lad, stood a little apart from the rest,
his eyes fixed on the ground, while I was talking to them. He said
nothing, but it was an hour of fixed resolve.

“Three days after one of the boys came to me, and said: ‘Sir, do you
remember the tall boy that stood near when you were talking to us?’
‘Yes, I do,’ I replied. ‘Well, sir, he has been trying ever since to
lead sinners to Christ; and he has persuaded three men, and two women,
and a little boy to give their hearts to the Saviour; and there he is,
sir, talking to that gray-haired man!’ I followed the direction of the
boy’s eye, and there stood the lad, his thoughtful face all aglow with
feeling, as he spoke earnestly to the old man, who shortly after came
forward, and knelt as a penitent at the altar of prayer. Who can
estimate the good thus accomplished by the earnest efforts of this lad;
and why may not every one follow his example, and make it his business
to lead souls to Christ?”

It was with reluctance they left this hallowed scene, where they had
been permitted to join the swell of holy song, and to hear so much that
was profitable; teachings that ought to make them better. Norman would
gladly have stayed for the evening services, to have seen those trees
gleaming out in the ruddy light, but they would not venture to travel
that road in the darkness. As it was they had a very pleasant drive
home, where they came just in time for tea.




                              CHAPTER XV.
                             A SABBATH-DAY.

         Types of eternal rest, fair buds of bliss,
           In heavenly flowers unfolding week by week
         The next world’s gladness imaged forth in this,
           Days of whose worth the Christian’s heart can speak.

                                                   VAUGHAN.


The Sabbath dawned clear and beautiful, bringing refreshing breezes
after the intense heat of the past fortnight. After the morning service
in the Methodist church Mrs. Lester stayed to the Bible class led by the
minister. The lesson was the eighth chapter of Romans, and it was
interesting to see two old men, with spectacles, bending earnestly over
one book, and talking over the meaning of the passage. The members of
the class were all men and women, and there was a very free interchange
of thought, as they looked into the Scriptures of truth. One face
especially attracted Mrs. Lester’s attention. It was a youthful face,
rather large, very fair, with light hair, blue eyes, and regular
features, not beautiful, but with a sweet, heavenly expression on the
high brow, and in the untroubled eye. In the class-meeting that followed
the Bible class, she spoke calmly, but with an unfaltering trust, of her
love to the Saviour, as being the master-passion of her soul; that she
loved God supremely, and found him to be a satisfying portion. Her
father, who led the class, spoke to her, with tears in his eyes, of the
time when her decrepit form would put on immortality, and would shine
with glorious beauty; when she would know no weary hours of pain, but
would dwell in the land where the inhabitants shall no more say, I am
sick, but where all tears shall be wiped away.

Yes, that sweet face was the face of a cripple. Her form was shrunken
and withered, and her limbs had never carried her whithersoever she
would. Her father took her into his arms at the close of the service,
her limbs hanging limp and as if without life, and carried her to the
little wagon in which he had drawn her to church. Mrs. Lester asked her
if she was not tired with the long service.

“O no,” she said; she would like to stay there till the evening
prayer-meeting at five o’clock.

It was not very often she could go to the house of God. She felt with
David, “A day in thy courts is better than a thousand: I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the house of my God than to dwell in the tents of
wickedness.” O how she loved the house of God, the place where his honor
dwelleth.

This poor, crippled girl, who had known no happy childhood, who had
never been able to participate in its sports, who had always been
confined to the narrow precincts of a home destitute of all the luxuries
of life, who had been daily accustomed to pain and privation, had yet
found the true secret of happiness. It lay like moonlight on her
countenance. She had that within which many of the rich and wise and
great, who look at will on the glorious scenery of earth, who command
the treasures of literature and art, who surround themselves with all
the comforts and appliances of a home of elegant sufficiency, fail to
gain—calm peace in her heart, perfect contentment with her lot, and a
spring of never-failing happiness. Nor is she useless in the world,
though she has no worldly means to give, nor hands or feet to do her
bidding. The light of her holy example, her patience, meekness,
resignation, and faith, are treasures to the Church. Every Wednesday
there is a prayer-meeting in her room, of which she takes the charge, as
she can be always present, and the beauty and propriety with which she
speaks of divine things make her words very profitable.

In the afternoon Mrs. Lester and Norman went to the prayer-meeting. At
the close of the service Mrs. Day, to whom Mrs. Clayton had introduced
her in the morning, came up and asked her to go home by the way of her
house, as she wished to gather some flowers for her. The large garden,
filled with flowers and shrubbery, blooming most luxuriantly in that
fertile soil, looked cool and inviting. Mrs. Day handed Norman some
flowers as the beginning of his bouquet, and told him to go and pick
what he liked. Pink and white spireces, double China pinks, a few
lingering June roses, the pretty bee larkspur, the coreopsis, candytuft,
and verbenas, were gathered in profusion by Mrs. Day’s lavish hand, and
arranged in two bouquets for Mrs. Clayton and Mrs. Lester. “Four years
ago,” said she, “this garden was a bare field. I never was so
discouraged in coming to any new place.”

“You certainly have transformed it into a very pleasant home,” replied
Mrs. Lester. “Taste and cultivation, with such a soil as this, can soon
work wonders. You can truly sit under your own vine and fig-tree,”
continued she, pointing to a beautiful grape-vine that had crept up a
lattice, and inclosed with its graceful green curtain a verandah in the
rear of the house.

“Yes,” said she, “I planted that vine myself, and it is a daily
rejoicing to me, and a sermon too. It reminds me continually of that
true Vine from which we must draw all our life and sustenance.”

“It is well,” said Mrs. Lester, “to have divine truths thus brought to
our minds by the objects that surround us.”

“My prairie home,” said Mrs. Day, “was really beautiful; that was quite
to my mind; a nice house shaded with trees, adorned with shrubbery and
flowers, and looking upon broad fertile fields.”

“Why did you leave so pretty a home?” asked Mrs. Lester.

“We came here to be near a church, and to enjoy religious privileges.
For years after we went on the prairie our house was the home of the
preachers, and meetings were always held there. As the country became
more settled the services were transferred to a church, four miles from
us, and we at length concluded to give up our home to our son, and come
to spend the evening of our lives in a place where we could constantly
enjoy the services of God’s house. We have tried to make religion the
chief business of our life, and God has prospered us.”

“And you enjoy this new country?” inquired Mrs. Lester.

[Illustration:

  No. 666.

  WESTERN SETTLER’S FIRST HOME.]

“It seems to me,” she replied, “the oldest country God has made; such
riches as these are in the soil all ready and prepared for the seed of
the sower, only waiting for man’s coming to yield of its abundance.”

The sun was tinging town and prairie with his parting beams, and the
garden was already in deep shadow when Norman and his mother, loaded
with bright and fragrant flowers, returned home.




                              CHAPTER XVI.
                              ON THE RAIL.

                   “All the while the swaying cars
                     Kept rumbling o’er the rail,
                   And the frequent whistle sent
                     Shrieks of anguish to the gale;
                   And the cinders pattered down
                     On the grimy floor like hail.”


Early, very early the next morning, the fifth of July, Mrs. Lester was
aroused by the firing of cannon, to celebrate our national independence.
Norman and Willie had kept the third, by firing off crackers all day,
and winding up with wheels, Roman candles, and blue lights, exhibited to
an appreciating audience on the portico in the evening. After breakfast
Norman, his Aunt Clara, and his mother bade good-by, and got in the
carriage which was to convey them to Batavia, the spires of which were
visible from Mr. Clayton’s. It was a pleasant drive of two miles in the
Fox River valley. The man drove very fast, and they were sorry to arrive
so soon at the place of their destination, especially when they were
told that they were to wait two hours for the arrival of the train. The
hackman, who had come for them before the time, had many demands for the
carriage, for which he charged an extra price in honor of the holiday. A
number of passengers were waiting for the train; many of them going to
the celebration at Aurora, a pretty town, all astir with gaily dressed
people, and a procession marching to the grove where already a crowd was
gathered. It was a most lovely country, soft rolling prairie, with its
wealth of golden wheat, of waving corn, of graceful barley, bordered by
rich groves of timber, and dotted here and there with towns and
villages.

At Mendota they left their cars, and entered those of the Illinois
Central Railroad. There were several trains there, and a great number of
passengers hurrying to and fro, and rushing in to dinner. Norman ran
first into one store, and then into another, to buy some torpedoes, as
he was very anxious to make some noise, to give vent to his patriotic
feeling. He came back with a large box full, just in time, for the train
was soon in motion. And the passengers too, for the road was so rough
that the people went dancing up and down in the most violent manner.
Mrs. Lester asked the conductor if the road was so rough all the way?
No, he said; they had passed over the worst of it. And with that hope
Mrs. Lester tried to enjoy the beautiful prairies, and the noble view of
the Illinois River as seen from the high embankment over which the road
passes.

Norman would like to have seen the “Starved Rock,” somewhere on this
river, whither some Indians, pursued by their enemies, fled for refuge.
They were surrounded, and all escape from the rock prevented by their
encircling foes, who, day after day, waited for them to surrender. At
length they scaled the rock, and found the garrison all starved to death
but one squaw, who calmly awaited the entrance of her enemies.

The Starved Rock, however, was not in sight, nor was any rock recalling
thrilling legend and heroic story; but another prospect, not so
agreeable, from the rear of the car near which they were seated—a long
strait road, the rails of which were rather too much curved to suggest
ideas of safety. “Don’t you think this road very unsafe?” inquired Mrs.
Lester of a gentleman who was contemplating this retrospective view of
dangers passed.

“Not _very_, but it might be safer.”

Up and down jumped all that car-load of passengers, whose faces wore not
the calmest and brightest expression. Suddenly there was an explosion
that startled people rather ready to be startled, and Mrs. Lester,
remembering the torpedoes, turned to Norman, who was looking out of the
rear window, and said reproachfully, “Norman, how can you do so?”

Every eye was directed toward the blushing lad, as he earnestly
exclaimed, “Mother, it was not me.”

Returning to his seat he looked for the torpedoes, which he found had
been jolted off the seat on the floor under his mother’s feet, and a
sudden movement of her foot had caused the explosion of ten or twelve of
them. “There, mother, it was you after all,” said Norman, as he gathered
up his remaining torpedoes.

Again they were startled—a prolonged whistle, and a stoppage of the cars
on an embankment at a distance from any station. Every head went out of
the windows, and some enterprising passengers went out on the platform
to learn the cause of this ominous pause. Again and again that warning
whistle; what did it mean? At length the matter was explained. About
twenty horses were on the track, galloping on in front of the
locomotive, which was obliged to pause till they separated to the right
and the left.

Right glad were the party when they arrived at Bloomington. Mrs. Lester
wished to go to a very handsome hotel, the photograph of which had been
shown to her on the Grey Eagle by the proprietor thereof. A large
unfinished building seemed to her very like the photograph she had seen;
but that could not be, as the photograph must have been taken from the
hotel in its finished, occupied state, with handsome stores beneath. On
inquiry she found this was the hotel in question, which stood there, an
arrested monument of western enterprise. They went to the hotel
opposite, and after tea some friends of Aunt Clara’s called to see them,
and to ask them to walk.

Bloomington is a large, finely situated town, on the rising prairie, not
far from the fine groves that mark the course of Sugar Creek. The
president of the Illinois University (situated in a grove near the town)
walked with them, and took them to the observatory on the Female
College, where they had a lovely sunset view of the town, the prairie,
and the distant woods. How cool and refreshing were those prairie
breezes after the intense heat of the day; but they were warned by the
fading light that it was time to return. No mountains or hills to
prolong the twilight in these regions. The sun sinks, and speedily the
darkness comes on. Miss Allen, Aunt Clara’s friend, insisted upon their
coming in to see her. With kindly hospitality she had sent for several
of Aunt Clara’s friends to meet her; and while Norman was amused with
some fireworks in the court-yard, they were refreshed with cake and
ice-cream. Miss Allen, her brothers, and Mrs. Lester had very pleasant
conversation about some mutual friends, and thus passed the evening to
an hour rather late for travelers who were to rise at two o’clock in the
morning.

At that early hour they were aroused, and the omnibus conveyed them to
the station at three o’clock, where they had the satisfaction of being
told that the cars had stopped above the junction, cause unknown.
Probably they had run off the track, and they might not arrive before
eight o’clock.

“There is the locomotive that is to take us,” said a gentleman, pointing
to the expectant iron horse, panting and snorting, and rushing to and
fro, as if impatient at the delay. “I saw him in the bank on Saturday,
just below here. But he has suffered no harm from running off the
track.”

“Near them stood an engineer with his arm in a sling. He had been
returning to his post, as he had been off duty, when he threw himself
forward to rescue a man who, having missed his footing on the step,
would have been under the wheel of the car. As it was, his struggles
loosened the footing of his deliverer, who succeeded in dragging him on
the truck, from which precarious position they were rescued as soon as
the train could be stopped. The engineer’s arm was badly broken, but the
man whose life he had saved never came to thank him. “I have no money to
give him, why should I go?” said he to the conductor, who told him to
thank the man who had periled life and limb to save him.”

“Men do not risk their lives for money,” replied the conductor, turning
away from the ungrateful man.

“The prospect looks rather dim,” said Aunt Clara, the first discouraging
word she had spoken.

“How calm and quiet she was,” said Norman, “when we were so frightened
in the rail car.”

The waiting-room of the station-house was not very comfortable for weary
passengers; Norman established himself on three chairs, and was soon
fast asleep on his hard bed; nor was he wakened when his mother slipped
her carpet-bag under his head.

A group near the door was more picturesque. It was a German family whom
they had seen the day before at the cars, and who had passed all night
at the station. One little girl lay across a bag, her head tending
toward the floor. The younger brother was on his knees, resting his head
on a chair, fast asleep; while near them, her head erect, as if watching
over her goods and chattels, sat the elder sister, a quaint,
prim-looking girl of thirteen, with a short waist, and a little shawl
pinned round it, and a broad flat over her braids of light hair; while
round her were bags, and boxes, and bundles, an incongruous heap, in
which it was at first somewhat difficult to distinguish the sleeping
children. The little boy at length, weary of his constrained position on
his knees, had pillowed his head on his sleeping sister’s foot, which,
by sundry twitches, and a few energetic kicks, freed itself from the
encumbering weight. But still the children slept on. The mother was
sitting outside of the door, silent, because none knew her language. At
length a telegram announced that the cars would be there at five. The
locomotive had been stopped because the rails were slippery.

The early twilight brightened into day, the train arrived, the
passengers stepped in, and a very short time brought Norman, his mother
and aunt to their point of destination; a few houses had been dropped
down on the prairie, as the nucleus of a town; not very promising as a
resting-place. Soon, however, a buggy and a wagon drove up for the
travelers, who, after a short drive, were welcomed by their relatives.




                             CHAPTER XVII.
                             THE PRAIRIES.

              “The wondrous, beautiful prairies,
      Billowy bays of grass, ever rolling in shadow and sunshine,
      Bright with luxuriant clusters of roses and purple amorphas;
      And over all is the sky, the clear and crystalline heaven,
      Like the protecting hands of God inverted above them.”

                                              EVANGELINE.


It looked quite homelike; the house shaded by tall trees, the garden,
the hedge of Osage orange shutting out the wide expanse of prairie. The
house was in the corner of Tazewell county; the barn in McLean, and the
greater part of the farm in a third county. Norman found two new aunts
to know and love, and a tall cousin of six feet three.

It was not long before he became acquainted with two little girls of ten
and twelve, cousins, who lived on a farm near, with whom he had many
pleasant hours of play. They had, too, a great deal to talk over of
their journings in the West, for these little girls had always before
lived in a New England home. They had seen a great many Indians, painted
in all their bravery, in Wisconsin. They had seen a squaw, with her
papoose strapped on her back, riding on a small Indian pony, with a
child before and a child behind.

“This, mother,” said Norman, “is pleasanter than all; one day on a
prairie is worth ten days in town.” He was up early in the morning to
see the horses watered before they were sent off to the field. There
were more then twenty of them, and Norman’s cousin, Justin, selected the
handsomest colt on the farm, and gave it to Norman for his own. Norman
was enchanted. He took an ear of corn, and Prince followed him about,
eating it from his hand. Even after Prince had gone down into the field,
he followed Norman and the ear of corn home.

“Mother, look at my colt,” said Norman in triumph; “how am I to get him
home?” There were various plans discussed, as the one idea took
possession of his mind, but no satisfactory conclusions were arrived at.
The glow of delight somewhat faded away. “I really do not know what good
my colt is going to do me,” said Norman, despondingly; “I cannot ride
him here, and I cannot take him home.”

His face brightened, however, when David brought up a horse for him to
ride. He had never rode before but once, when the pony threw him over
his head; but he said this was the sort of riding he would like, to
charge over the prairies.

He did ride off several miles over the prairies by himself, and then he
rode four miles with his Aunt Clara.

It was the time of harvest, and Norman loved to watch the mowing machine
as it so rapidly cut down the tall grass, and the hay-making, and the
tossing it into the great hay-stack. But what most interested him was to
watch the progress of the great header, with its three attendant wagons,
as it loomed up so grandly in the harvest field. Three horses urged
onward the machine, which cut off the heads of the wheat and threw it on
a platform, whence it was taken up in an elevator and received into a
wagon, which accompanied the gigantic machine till it was loaded, and
then, giving place to another, drove to the great stack with its burden.
This machine requires three attendant wagons and six men, who thus cut
down as much wheat as fifteen men can do in the ordinary way, and stack
it to boot. These mowing and reaping machines seem especially intended
for the extensive level grain fields of Illinois, which would look in
vain for reapers and mowers with the old sickle and scythe. Something is
lost however in picturesque effect, as was most manifest in the field
next to that which the great header was so rapidly despoiling of its
riches. This field was dotted over with the graceful sheaves of wheat,
while a number of men were engaged in the work of binding and stacking
them together.

Norman had watched too the ploughman, who, with a cultivator passing
between the shining corn, did the work more laboriously done at the East
by hoeing.

He liked to watch the herds of cattle and sheep feeding on the prairies;
great herds, for everything was on a great scale on these western farms.

But better even than this were the stories his cousin Justin told him
about his boyish days. He was twenty-three years old, and he had lived
on the prairie sixteen years. It used to be the custom, he said, to
plant a flagstaff in some central position, and invite horsemen to leave
the groves all around and ride to this point at a certain hour. As the
hour approached horsemen would be seen issuing from all the groves,
riding rapidly onward, driving before them wolves, and the timid deer,
till a dense ring of three or four hundred horsemen inclosing the
frightened animals who were then dispatched by the clubs with which the
men were armed. Sometimes the desperate wolves broke through the ring
where it was weakest, and then there was waving of hats, and cheering,
and galloping after the animals, and all was wild uproar. “I can
remember” said he “the charm these wolf-hunts had for me when I was a
boy of twelve; how I armed myself with my club, mounted my spirited
horse, and galloped off to the stirring scene.”

“My cousin Walter,” continued Justin, “liked to hunt the wolf alone. One
day he encountered a prairie wolf, whom he pursued till the wolf plunged
into the stream to escape him. Seizing him by the tail, he cut the
strings of his hind legs, during which operation the wolf bit his foot,
leaving the mark of his long teeth through his boot. The disabled wolf,
however, as it emerged from the water, made but slow progress, and
Walter, disengaging his stirrups, gave him a blow in the forehead which
killed him, and stripping off his skin, he returned home with his
trophy, afterward to do good service in the form of a muff for his
sister.”

Then he told of the prairie fires that came every year. To be prepared
for the approach of this fiery invader they ploughed several furrows
near the fence of their farm, and then several furrows at the distance
of about four rods, and to the grass on that interval they set fire,
that this bared strip might oppose a barrier to the flames. Onward they
would come when the wind was from the same quarter, with the speed of a
locomotive, crackling, flashing, leaping high in the air, rolling great
waves of lurid light onward with fierce rapidity. They would watch the
on-coming of this sheeted flame, terrible in its fiery glare, crimsoning
the heavens with its ruddy glow, consuming everything in its path,
sending up fiery messengers into the sky, and wonder whether it would be
possible for them to escape. “It was a magnificent sight,” continued he;
“never do I expect to see anything so terrible in its sublimity and
beauty. Now that the prairies are covered over with the habitations of
men, we have no more prairie fires, and no more wolf hunts. No more
fierce pursuer did the prairie wolf find than this untiring adversary of
flame, driving before it the terrified wolves and the gentle deer,
flying for life till they reached some timber where the fire would be
arrested.”

Norman was very sorry when the day came for him to leave. He was sorry
to leave his aunts and cousins, to whom he had become very much
attached; he was sorry to leave his colt, and to give up his pleasant
rides on horseback. The day they were to leave they were to dine with
another aunt of Norman’s, and Norman, accompanied by David, rode there
on horseback, while his cousin Justin was to drive his mother in his
buggy. She had very much enjoyed her daily drives over the prairies,
enamelled with flowers, of every new variety of which Justin stopped to
gather for her, and which she prized as memorials of those pleasant
hours.

At his aunt’s Norman saw the picture of his Cousin Walter—the hero of
the wolf story—a face full of intelligence and sweetness, a slender
form. He was a brilliant youth, with high hopes and aspirations, when,
in the midst of his collegiate course, he was stricken down by cholera,
and in a few days was numbered with the dead.

After dinner Norman mounted his horse, and, attended by David, who rode
beautifully, he took his way toward the station. His mother and his
cousin started about half an hour afterward, and pursued their winding
way. The road on the prairies is continually changing; as the new farms
are fenced, the owners divert the road from their fields to the exterior
of their farms. One memorable place Mrs. Lester had passed on her drive
to the village the evening before. It was a slough where, in the spring,
a pair of horses were so completely buried that it was necessary to
employ oxen to drag them out by the head. One field, on their way to the
station, looked as if it were covered with pansies, the rather coarse
flowers with which it was filled being softened by distance into this
likeness.

They drove across a grassy field that looked as if it must at some time
have been the bed of a great river, so strikingly did the woodlands
resemble the banks. Indeed, one is often struck, in looking out upon the
prairies, with the resemblance to a sea view. At the margin there will
frequently be a mist, such as bounds the view on the water; the groves
of timber jut out into the prairie like headlands, and the eye often
follows these indentations as if tracing the shore of a vast lake.
Proofs are not wanting to establish the fact that Illinois was once the
bed of a great lake, probably an expansion of the Mississippi, till it
broke though on its headlong course to the Gulf of Mexico. The prairie
breezes come every day to moderate the intense heat of summer, and sweep
over these vast plains as on the bosom of a great inland sea. Those who
build in the timber lose these refreshing winds.

Mrs. Lester was somewhat troubled on arriving at the station to find
that Norman was not there, though he had left so long before her, and
she looked rather anxiously over the prairie for some signs of his
coming. The boys were not visible, and she was contemplating the
prospect of returning to the kind friends whom she had left when they
came in sight. She waved her handkerchief to them to hasten, as the
train was due in five minutes. Just in time; the train was in sight as
Norman stepped on the platform; and as Justin accompanied them into the
cars to find them seats, Mrs. Lester hurried him off, lest he should be
taken on, so short was the pause at the station.




                             CHAPTER XVIII.
                     CHICAGO, AND THE RIDE THITHER.

                 Chicago! thou shalt shine in verse,
                   As my adopted pet;
                 Thou newest slice of this New World,
                   Save what is newer yet.
                 Thy structures seem of yesterday,
                 And shine like scenery in the play
                   Just pushed upon the stage.—F. G. H.


The ride was very agreeable: boundless views of rolling prairie, that
looked like English park scenery; scattered groves, pretty farm houses,
thriving villages, afforded a constant succession of agreeable objects.
Far to the west was seen a threatening cloud, at length descending in
torrents of rain to the westward, while the sudden, violent wind that
swept across the track of the cars was succeeded by dashes of rain. A
curious optical illusion was produced by the sun shining from behind a
dark cloud, and throwing lines of light across the prairie, producing
the effect of a fort, and of long rows of white buildings. The sun was
setting behind clouds of crimson and gold when the train arrived at
Joliet, and stopped twenty minutes for refreshments.

Joliet, named in honor of the citizen of Quebec who first trod the soil
of Iowa, is a handsome town, ornamented with numerous spires. Here are
fine quarries of the beautiful cream-colored stone used so much in
Chicago, and transported thither by a canal running over the low wet
prairies parallel with the railroad.

While waiting till the train from Chicago should pass them, Norman had a
fine view of some splendid rockets in honor of the arrival of a noted
politician in the city.

At the station they found their kind friend, Mr. Percy, and he drove
them to his house very rapidly. Late as it was, Mrs. Percy and Miss Ray
were at the door to welcome them, and, after a few words of greeting, to
show them to their rooms.

The next morning Norman went fishing with Charley Percy, and while he
was gone his Uncle and Aunt Lester came in Mrs. Hunter’s carriage to
take them for a drive. Mrs. Hunter took them to her house, where they
had iced lemonade; and Mrs. Lester returned, promising to take tea and
stay all night with Mr. and Mrs. Lester at her brother’s, where they
were staying. This brother was a minister, and his home had an
atmosphere of taste and refinement and piety. Choice books, in every
room, invited perusal; illustrated works attracted the eye; a canary
warbled its sweet notes, especially when the piano was touched; and the
mistress of the house sang the songs her husband had written. Most
pleasantly did every object harmonize with the repose of the Sabbath.
The new Methodist church edifice was in the next street, and the
services were held for the last time in the lecture-room, as on next
Thursday the church was to be dedicated to the worship of God. At the
love-feast in the afternoon there was an earnest expression of gratitude
to God for the abundant mercies he had showered upon them during the
past winter, and for the prosperity that had attended their efforts to
erect a house to his service.

Mrs. Percy sent the carriage for them in the afternoon, and they found
the family assembled in the parlor, singing sacred songs. Each one had
the music of the hymns, and the hour before tea thus passed most
pleasantly. In the evening Norman and his mother went with Mr. and Mrs.
Percy to church, and heard an excellent sermon from Dr. Rice, on the
breast-plate of faith and love, and the helmet, the hope of salvation.
“How much reason have we for thankfulness,” said Mrs. Lester to Norman
in the evening, “that everywhere we have found Christian homes;
everywhere family prayer, and a love for God’s house and service. How
many such privileges have we enjoyed!”

The next morning Dr. Davis called to invite them to pay him a visit;
Norman went with Albert Davis, and a few hours afterward the doctor
called in his carriage for Mrs. Lester. Norman’s uncle and aunt were in
the carriage, and when they arrived at the doctor’s country place, they
found Norman lying on the grass, contemplating Albert’s pony.

Norman found some very interesting books filled with large colored
plates of birds, and plants, and Indians. He looked at these portraits
of the red men, taken by Mr. Catlin, and read sketches of their history
with great interest

In the afternoon Dr. Davis drove them to see the pretty grounds of a
gentleman in the neighborhood, and to the Lake View House, where they
drank some iced lemonade, and wandered on the beach. It seemed very much
like the sea-shore, the great waves rolling in and dashing against the
sand, and, a little below, the hulk of a vessel blown ashore and
stranded in the recent storm. Such proofs of the power of old Michigan,
when its waves rise up in their might, may be seen all along its shores,
unprovided as they are with harbors for vessels to take refuge in at the
approach of the tempest.




                              CHAPTER XIX.
                             ON THE LAKES.

                “On the shores of Gitche Gumee,
                Westward by the Big-Sea Water.

                       *       *       *       *       *

                Can it be the sun descending,
                Sinking down into the water?
                All the sky is stain’d with purple,
                All the water flush’d with crimson!”


Lake Superior, the mighty lake, fed by two hundred rivers and streams,
plunging down falls and rapids to mingle their waters with those of this
inland ocean; with its stern rocky walls, and overhanging crags; with
its rich mines of copper, silver, and iron; with its abundant fisheries
of trout, pickerel, pike, carp, black fish, and white fish; and with its
grand pictured rocks, presenting columns, towers, arches, and ruins, and
hollowed out into vast caverns, echoing with tremendous roar to the dash
of the waves. An excursion proposed to this lake offered great
attractions, and Mrs. Lester was tempted to go on the fine steamer that
was to take a party thither.

Norman supplied himself with trolling-hook and fishing tackle, as the
steamer was to stop frequently to allow the passengers to fish in those
cold, clear, transparent waters. Charley Percy and his friend, Alfred
Scarborough, somewhat older than himself, were going in the steamer to
Collingwood, on their way to Niagara; so in the evening they went to the
boat, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Percy, and Alfred’s father and mother.
The saloon was gayly lighted up, the band playing; the state-rooms were
very comfortable, and the beginning of the voyage at least was very
promising.

Good-by was said to their kind friends, and the steamer moved slowly
down the river, past the warehouses, and through the bridges, in the
darkness, amid the gleaming lights here and there, and to the sound of
music, and it all seemed very dream-like. At length they reached the
lake, and the regular lines of light on Michigan Avenue sparkled as they
sailed away. It was very late, near eleven o’clock, and the travelers
soon sought the repose of their berths. Mrs. Lester only wakened in the
morning in time to see the graceful spires of Racine, sleeping in the
early morning light.

About ten o’clock they sailed into the harbor of Milwaukee, built on
both sides of the Milwaukee River, on a high bluff overlooking the lake.
Most of the town is built of the Milwaukee brick, which is of a light
straw-color; and though this brick is a very fine building material, yet
it harmonizes too much with the color of the sandy streets and sandy
bluff to give a fine effect to the town. A stronger contrast would be
better. There are some very fine buildings; a hotel of beautiful and
elaborate design, and a custom-house of fine architecture, built of
white stone.

Until one o’clock “The Planet” remained at Milwaukee, awaiting the
arrival of a party who wished to go on the excursion, and who had
telegraphed them from Chicago, and this delay enabled the passengers to
ride and walk about the town.

A sad sight met the eyes of those who remained on the boat. The
steamboat Traveler was just passing them, on its way out of the harbor,
when the mate, who had given some orders not followed to his
satisfaction, let himself down from the upper deck, by catching hold of
the middle rail of the balustrade. The rail broke, and the man was
thrown into the water, probably receiving some mortal blow on the way,
as he never rose. Truly there is but a step between us and death. In
that calm water, on that still, sunny day, the hardy seaman who had
braved death in the darkness and tempest, found a grave.

It was very warm, and all were glad when the steamer was once more in
motion, and the fresh breezes of the lake came with their cooling for
heated brows. It was rather too fresh after a while, and there was more
motion than was consistent with the enjoyment of some of the passengers.
There was a shower, too, dimpling the lake, and driving most of the
people into the saloon.

Norman had his first experience of seasickness, and retiring to his
berth at five o’clock, he slept there till the morning. His mother was
very sorry to have him miss that magnificent sunset on Lake Michigan.
The rain had passed away, and a light breeze crisped the waters. The
boat had made its last landing, and the little town they were leaving
was glorified by its back ground of amber, deepening into a brilliant
orange. Every house and tree came out with marvelous distinctness, as
the sun dipped behind the western horizon, and painted, after he had
passed from view, a gorgeous picture as his parting gift—a gift not to
be lost with the fleeting hour, or to be confounded with other gifts
from the same source. It was marvelous in its beauty. Clouds of rich
crimson, fading into brown, were festooned on the serene radiance of the
clear sky. A wealth of celestial drapery seemed drawn aside to reveal
the far-off glory. As these kindling hues faded away, a cloud nearer the
horizon assumed the aspect of a woodland scene receding from the shore
of the lake. There were the headlands jutting into the water, the
nodding groves, the bays running into the land. It was difficult to make
all this extensive country only cloud-land, and the little company at
the stern of the boat gazed upon it till the gathering darkness hid it
from view.

It was a night of glorious shows; about ten o’clock the northern lights
threw up their quivering brilliant scintillations far up into the
heavens, glorifying the north with a bow of flickering beauty, even as
the west had been glorified with masses of magnificent clouds. The lake,
however, was almost too rough to allow many spectators to enjoy this
glimpse of northern splendors, and most of the passengers sought the
safe security of their berths.

Early in the morning Norman was called by his mother to come out on deck
and see the Manitou Islands, with their sandy bluffs and crown of green
trees. Norman looked at them a long time in silence by himself. When he
came to his mother he said: “I feel almost as if I had been looking at
the Holy Land; those islands were the holy land to the Indians, the
dwelling-place of the Great Spirit, not to be approached by mortals.”

“It made me very fanciful to look at them,” continued Norman. “The great
cloud of smoke that our steamer is sending toward the island, and that
now hovers over it, seemed to me an oblation to the great Manitou of the
Indians.”

There was a visitor from those islands; a pretty little bird that
lighted on the ropes, and jumped about the deck till frightened away.

They passed Beaver Island, once inhabited by the Mormons, who, the
captain said, seemed a very quiet, inoffensive people when they lived
there. He said they had been very kind in assisting him once when he ran
ashore near their island.

After breakfast Norman, his mother, and Alfred Scarborough went to the
hurricane deck. Soon a gentleman came up, and walked vigorously up and
down, giving at each turn some good advice to Norman. He was an English
clergyman, hale and fresh complexioned, with a bright eye, and firm,
quick step, though he was seventy years of age. “I have come out,” he
said, “to get some fresh air before breakfast. There are not many young
men that can run up a mountain like me. Many young men only smoke, and
sleep, and eat; they never think of taking vigorous exercise. They will
never be able to walk as I do at my age.

“Walk, my boy,” said he, putting his hand on Norman’s shoulder “run,
leap, and you will grow strong. Those are the Fox Islands, are they?
Well, I must go down to my breakfast, they will not make much on me; I
can eat a pound more than I could have when I came up.” And thus ending
his walk and sentences together, he went down stairs.

It was a lovely morning; the cool breeze was exhilarating, and the
morning passed quickly away as they glided through the straits that
connect Lake Michigan and Lake Huron; the straits so long known under
the formidable name of the Straits of Michilimackinac, now abridged to
Mackinaw.




                              CHAPTER XX.
                        MACKINAW AND LAKE HURON.

          In our wake there follow’d, white as flakes of snow,
          Seven adventurous sea-gulls, floating to and fro;
          Diving for the bounty of the bread we threw,
          Dipping, curving, swerving—fishing as they flew.

                                                    MACKAY.


Just after dinner they reached Mackinaw, where a number of the
excursionists were to remain until the boat returned from Collingwood.
The captain said they would remain at Mackinaw time enough to visit the
fort.

Ready at the gangway as the boat touched the shore, Mrs. Lester, Norman,
with a number of others, rushed on shore, scarcely pausing to look
through the clear, transparent water at the white pebbles of the beach.
Up the hill to the fort, the sun shining down on them with fervent heat,
while his rays were reflected from the white walls. It was, however, a
short, direct road, and the lovely view fully repaid them for the
momentary heat. A peaceful scene lay beneath them; the quiet little
village of Mackinaw, with its humble dwellings; the beach, sweeping
round in the form of a crescent, and the placid waters of Lake Huron
beyond, made a pretty picture; the sentinel walking to and fro on his
post; the heavy pieces of artillery, and piles of shot and shell.
Soldiers, grouped here and there, greatly interested Norman. The descent
was very steep, and Norman in one minute found himself at the foot of
the walled-in road which they had ascended. On arriving at the boat they
found the men engaged in putting on shore sheep and cattle for the
support of the soldiers, whose provision is thus brought to them. Taking
advantage of the delay, Norman rushed on shore to buy some birch bark
boxes, filled with maple sugar, and embroidered in porcupine quills. As
he showed them to his mother on his return, she ventured up the street
to buy some Indian work, emboldened by the sight of the captain walking
before her.

A group of Indian women, in their own dress, with blue cloth blankets
and leggings, attracted their attention as they entered the shop. They
were Ottawas, and one of them had a face of great beauty. It was oval:
her features were fine, and there was a pensive expression, a look of
sadness on her face, that made her very interesting. Mrs. Lester wanted
to look at that face of sorrowful meaning, and learn something of her
history; but the sight of the captain, on his return to the boat,
hastened her movements, and hastily selecting some fans and boxes of
maple sugar, with an embroidered canoe of birch bark, she hurried away.

Nine more sheep to land; there would have been a few moments to spare
for a longer perusal of the face of that Ottawa maiden, but it was safe
to come when they did, and not run the risk of being left. And so they
were once more in motion, with hastily gathered memories of Mackinaw,
its town and fort.

“Norman,” said Mrs. Lester, “did you ever hear of a famous game of ball
at Mackinaw?”

“No, mother; please tell me about it.”

“It was in June. A number of Indians had arrived near the fort,
apparently to trade, and a day was appointed for a game of ball, of
which they are very fond. Stakes were planted, and the game, in playing
which the great object is to keep the ball beyond the adversary’s goal,
began. The Indians uttered loud cries in the wild excitement of the
game, and the commandant of the fort and his lieutenant stood outside of
the gate to watch them. The ball was tossed nearer and nearer the fort,
and the excited crowd of Indians ran and leaped after it, when suddenly
they rushed upon the two officers at the gate, and imprisoned them. At
once they joined some Indians who had come into the fort under pretense
of trading, and imprisoned the whole garrison, seventeen of whom they
put to death.

“This was the beginning of Pontiac’s war.”

“I never heard of this game of ball,” said Norman; “but I can tell as
good a story of a pair of moccasins. May I?”

“Certainly,” said his mother. “I would like to hear it.”

“Well, mother, I believe this was at the beginning of Pontiac’s war too.
An Indian woman had made some moccasins for Major Gladstone, who
commanded the fort at Detroit. They were made of a curious elk-skin that
he valued very much. He paid her for them, and gave her the rest of the
skin, asking her to make another pair for a friend of his. The squaw
seemed unwilling to go home, and the major sent for her, and asked her
what she was waiting for. She said she did not like to take the elk-skin
that he thought so much of, as she could not make another pair of
moccasins. He asked her why she could not make them. At first she would
not tell; but then she said he had been very good to her, and she would
tell him the secret, that she might save his life.

“The Indians, who had asked permission to visit the fort the next day,
that they might present the calumet to Major Gladstone, were coming with
their guns cut off, that they might hide them under their blankets;
then, when Pontiac presented the calumet in some peculiar way, they were
to fire upon the officers.

“The soldiers were stationed outside of the room where the council was
to be held; the officers were armed, and when Pontiac was about to
present the calumet, the officers partially drew their swords from their
scabbards, and the clank of the soldiers’ arms was heard outside.
Pontiac turned pale, and presented the calumet without the preconcerted
signal.

“Major Gladstone then stepped up to one of the Indians, pulled aside his
blanket, and revealed the gun cut short, just as the squaw had said. He
accused Pontiac of treachery, but said that as he had promised them a
safe audience, they might go out of the town unharmed.”

“Perhaps if he had kept them prisoners,” said Mrs. Lester, “he might
have prevented the war that ensued.”

How beautiful the island looked in its commanding position! The high
land in the center, with its lofty forests rising like a curve. How much
they would have enjoyed the day that had been promised them at Mackinaw
to visit the old fort on its central heights, the arched rock, and the
wild solitudes of this picturesque region. The bold rock known as the
Lover’s Leap stood out finely from the greenwood behind, and Norman
listened to its story told him by Mr. Bard. An Indian maiden, who had
refused to marry a brave who loved her very much, was one day seated on
this lofty rock, looking out on the grand view beneath her, when she
heard a stealthy step, and her rejected lover stood by her side. The
hour, the scene were propitious to his suit, and again it was urged with
all the warmth of earnest affection. The maiden listened, hesitated, and
at length told him that if he would leap off that cliff she would marry
him. The Indian raised his tall form to its utmost height, looked at the
sea, the sky, and then at the beautiful face for which he periled the
sight of both, and leaped from the giddy verge. Strange to say, without
loss of life or limb, with the agility and skill of a well-trained
Indian, he took the fearful leap, which was broken by the branches of
trees and shrubbery beneath. And thus he won his Indian bride.

Mr. Bard, who had come to the country when there were but two houses in
Chicago out of the fort, had been familiar with it when the Indian
tribes roved at will over the vast prairies of Illinois. He spoke four
of their languages, and could sing their songs. He had been twice cast
away on the shores of Lake Michigan, and he could tell many a tale of
wild adventure. More wonderful than any fairy tale was the aspect of the
cultivated farms, the neat farm-houses, the numerous villages and towns,
with their spires pointing skyward, the great city that had all grown up
in a few years beneath his eye. And those red men, with whom he had been
so familiarly associated, where had they gone? How rapidly those western
regions are losing the element of the picturesque that the Indian with
his bark canoe and his wigwam give to their lakes and rivers, with their
wooded shores.

He told Norman of a most curious scene he had once witnessed. An Indian
had a very handsome pony, which another Indian was anxious to purchase,
but which he resolutely refused to sell. They were both drinking, when
the owner of the pony, finding his stock of whisky exhausted, asked the
other to give or sell him a mouthful from his remaining bottle. He at
first declined, but, on being entreated, said that he would give him a
mouthful of whisky for the pony. The Indian at once consented to give up
his favorite horse for the momentary gratification, and putting his lips
to those which had recently imbibed the whisky, he received the
stipulated mouthful.

It was a repetition, in these western wilds, of the old Hebrew story,
the sacrifice of a birthright by the hungry hunter for the mess of
pottage given him by the plain man dwelling in tents. Well, were this
the solitary repetition! but, alas! Esaus are found in all our borders,
giving up, for the indulgence of present clamorous desires, an
inheritance more glorious than any to which the first-born of earth
could ever lay claim.

The captain asked Norman if he had seen the northern lights the evening
before. Norman said that he was asleep, and asked the captain if he
frequently saw them.

“O yes,” he replied, “they are very brilliant in these high latitudes.
The Indians think they are the dance of the dead. One evening I came on
deck, and looking up at that pole I saw a bird just resting on the gilt
ball that surmounts it. I seemed to hear the soft flutter of her wings.
I watched it for some time, and then went in and called the engineer to
look at it. He too saw it, and when I turned to look at the boat every
line and point seemed luminous. He was showing it to some ladies, and
pointing toward it a light blue flame streamed from his finger.
Everything was highly charged with electricity, which produced the
semblance of the bird on the flagstaff on the bow. I never saw anything
like it.”

“How long did it last?” asked Norman.

“About two hours.”

Norman then asked him about Lake Superior, and he told him of the
wonderful beauty of the pictured rocks, of the castles and temples
jutting out of their bold front, of their arched caverns; that those
majestic rocks, three hundred feet high, extend ten miles, and the
Indians passed them with awful reverence, thinking that they were the
dwelling-place of the great Manitou.

The captain spoke of the sudden storms so violent in this “Big Sea
Water” in the autumn, and showed Norman a very beautiful gold watch that
had been presented to him by the citizens of Superior City, in honor of
his courage, skill, and fidelity when his vessel was exposed to a severe
storm, and he brought her safely through the snow, and ice, and tempest.
On the case was engraved a picture of the “Lady Elgin,” and on the heavy
gold chain, secured by an anchor to his buttonhole, were his initials,
in massive gold letters.

The captain showed Norman the straits that led up into Lake Superior,
and he regretted his mother had given up the excursion around the lake.
She concluded that as they had been gone two months from home, it would
not be well to set out on an excursion that would detain them ten or
twelve days longer, and expose them, moreover, to traveling on the
Sabbath. The home prospect looked so bright, however, that they did not
regret very much the loss of the sight of the prairies and rocks, and
all the desolate glories of this great lake.

“Norman,” said his mother, “just think of the courage it must have
required when, more than two hundred years ago, two French missionaries
sailed over these lonely lakes. They were seventeen days in a light bark
canoe. They sailed past the pretty islands we shall soon see in Georgian
Bay, and over the clear waters upon which we are now sailing, up the
river St. Mary, which the captain showed you, which leads to Lake
Superior, and there, at the Sault St. Marie, they told the Indians about
Jesus:

                        “‘A birch canoe with, paddles,
                Rising, sinking on the water,
                Dripping, flashing in the sunshine,
                And within it came a people
                From the distant land of Wabrun,
                From the farthest realms of morning
                Came the black-robe chief, the prophet,
                He the priest of prayer; the pale-face
                With his guides and his companions.’”

A lady showed Norman a picture of the rapids at the Sault St. Marie,
with a number of Indians in their canoes; and the captain said they
would paddle their canoes up the rapids, and then throwing their nets in
the water as they came down, would catch the fish going up the stream.

After tea they seated themselves in the stern of the vessel, and looked
at her track far over the lake. The air was cool and exhilarating, and
it was with devout gratitude to God for the wonderful display of his
mighty works, and for his abundant blessings, that some of the company
gazed upon the serene glory of the sunsetting. It was not gorgeous, as
was the sunset on Lake Michigan, with clouds of purple and crimson, but
slowly, slowly the shining orb dipped behind the waters. The evening
star hung trembling in the sky, faintly shining out from that region of
pale gold; while the moon, high in the western heavens, promised for
many hours her silvery light.

Norman brought out his trolling-hook, that he might have the pleasure of
throwing it into Lake Huron, as he was denied that of fishing in Lake
Superior. He let it out at the end of a long and strong fishing line,
and amused himself watching it bounce out of the water, and feeling the
twitches it gave his hand as the boat moved rapidly onward. A lady, who
sat near, was very much amused at the stout resistance of the waves. At
length Norman drew in his line, and lo! and behold the hook was gone.
The action of the waves had worn away the stout cord, made still
stronger by being wound around with thread.

“There,” said Norman, “I have lost the hook which cost me twenty-five
cents.”

“I think it has given us twenty-five cents’ worth of pleasure,” said the
lady, who had been watching the dancing line.

“And you have the honor of having lost your hook in the clear waters of
Lake Huron,” added his mother. Norman was meanwhile tying to the end of
his line the little board on which the line had been wound, and he threw
that in the water in place of the hook. This was a more stirring
pastime. The board offered so much stronger resistance to the waves,
that Norman had to wind the line several times around his hand to retain
his hold. At one moment the jerk was so violent, that the cord drew the
boy toward the low balustrade, over which he might have easily gone, but
for the interposing arms of the lady and his mother, at once thrown
round him. There was a start among the little company as they perceived
the boy’s danger, and Mrs. Lester told Norman he had now better draw in
his line.

A new entertainment succeeded. Norman had been watching a sea-gull that
had been following directly in the track of their vessel for many miles
long before sunset; those untiring wings of snowy white had borne the
graceful bird onward, and ever and anon she made a circling sweep, and
rested a while on the bosom of the water.

“Norman,” said Mrs. Bard, “you go to the pantry, and ask for some pieces
of bread, and throw them in the water, and you will soon have a flock of
sea-gulls following you.”

Norman waited not a second bidding, and soon came back with some rolls
and pieces of bread. He threw some in, and the gull did not see them. He
then waited till the bird came quite near the vessel, and threw it up
toward her. Then he had the satisfaction of seeing the gull slowly
circle round and round, till it picked up the morsel of bread. In a few
minutes another gull came, and then another, and then another, till six
white birds, on rapid wing, were hovering over the vessel’s track, and
picking up the bread cast upon the waters.

Norman’s delight knew no bounds. It is pleasant to feed chickens in a
barn-yard; but what is that compared to feeding gulls on Lake Huron, and
seeing them wing their flight at your call through the trackless
solitudes of air. He was sorry when the darkness prevented the sea-gulls
from seeing the pieces of bread, and they

                 “Wing’d their way to far-off islands,
                 To their nests among the rushes.”

The evening star soon set, and the moon was left pale empress of the
sky. How glorious was the path of silvery light she threw across the
water. Sweet strains of music sounded from the band, and the eye,
following that radiant pathway, would see in it now a silvery cascade,
and now a shining road to a niche, in which hung the moon, the crescent
lamp of night. It was a sweet conclusion to a day rich in enjoyment.
Sea, sky, and air had brought their tribute; and the heart of man had
rejoiced, as the eye took in this wealth of beauty. What suitable
expression those feelings found in the language of the nineteenth Psalm!

[Illustration:

  No. 666.

  COMMON GULL.]

             “The heavens declare the glory of God,
             And the firmament showeth his handy work.
             Day unto day uttereth speech,
             And night unto night showeth knowledge.
             There is no speech nor language
             Where their voice is not heard.
             Their line is gone out through all the earth,
             And their words to the end of the world.”




                              CHAPTER XXI.
                              COLLINGWOOD.

      “Forests burned for clearing, to spare the woodman’s stroke,
      Buttonwood and chestnut, and ash, and giant oak.”


A bright band of light clearly defined the eastern horizon, and heralded
the approach of the sun. A steamer, making its way along the shore,
stood out with great distinctness in the clear atmosphere. They were in
Georgian Bay, dotted with pretty islands, and near the southwestern
shore, deeply indented and covered with timber.

“There are our friends, the sea-gulls,” exclaimed Norman. Yes, there
they were—

                      “The hungry sea-gulls
                  Came back from the reedy islands,
                  Clamorous for the morning banquet,”

their white wings glancing in the sunlight. At length Collingwood was
visible, a stone light-house, on an island, passed, then another wooden
light-house, and they were in the harbor.

Norman saw two wigwams among the trees, and a “dug-out” with four or
five Indians in it.

The train had left twenty minutes before the smoke of the Planet was
seen, and a telegram was sent to Toronto requesting a special train,
which it was thought would be granted. The passengers were all seated in
the cars, the locomotive had its steam up, when a telegram came to say
that there could be no train before four o’clock.

Collingwood is a collection of unpainted houses built in the sand, most
dreary and uninviting in its aspect. Norman and his mother, and Alfred
Scarborough, walked through its streets. The stores are shaded by
evergreens, stuck in the ground, to afford a temporary shade. They went
into several stores, to buy some Indian things, but there was no one in
the store to sell them, and after waiting a while they were obliged to
leave. At length Mrs. Lester found some pretty boxes, worked with
porcupine quills, and Norman bought an Indian battle-axe.

After wandering a while on the shores of the lake, looking down into its
clear transparent waters, and gathering some wild flowers, they returned
to the boat, where they found the other passengers. The view of the
harbor of Collingwood was very pretty, the waters were blue and
beautiful, and the breezes cool and bracing.

Norman watched with great interest a race between a little sloop and
schooner, round the light-house. The wind was so fresh that the vessels
leaned very far over, and seemed in some danger of being capsized.

While the train was coming slowly up from the pier to the station, where
the passengers awaited it, a gentleman, with a baby in his arms, was
walking on the track. The English clergyman rushed forward before it,
waving his umbrella and crying, “Off, man, off the track, or in one
moment you will be crushed to atoms.”

Again they were seated in the cars. “What beautiful spikes of purple
flowers,” exclaimed Mrs. Lester, “and close by the station. I wish we
had seen them.”

“And those brilliant red flowers,” said Norman, “Did you ever see
anything prettier?”

“Do you think they are flowers or berries” asked his mother; “we go so
fast that I cannot tell which they are.”

At a station where they stopped, a gentleman got out and gathered some
of these red berries, handing them to Mrs. Lester through the window.

“Red elderberries,” said Mrs. Lester; “very pretty, but not the gorgeous
flowers we thought them; we cannot press these.”

The road lay through timber, and the stations were groups of unpainted
houses in the clearings. Felled trees and blackened stumps met the eye
in every direction.

At a station near Lake Simcoe the train stopped for two or three
minutes, and Norman and his mother rushed to an opening, where they had
a lovely view of the pretty sheet of water.

A longer view they had, though not so lovely, when the train went down
on a short railroad running to the lake, to take the passengers who had
made the circuit of it in the little steamboat. The boat was in sight,
but some distance off, so that the passengers seated themselves on the
pier, or on the piles of boards that encumbered it. Logs and boards met
the eye in every direction, and an immense steam saw-mill was at work,
converting the felled trees of the great forest through which they had
passed, into the boards with which the settler builds his house.

“Where is Norman?” asked Mrs. Lester anxiously of Mr. Campbell, a Scotch
gentleman. “I do not see him anywhere.” The gentleman told her he would
look for him, and in a few minutes he returned with the boy.

“Mother, I went up to that wood to gather some of these beautiful purple
flowers for you, and for that young lady. She said she would like some
of them, and I saw that the steamboat was so far off that I had time.”

“You should have told me where you were going, my child, and you would
have spared me some moments of anxiety.”

“I am sorry, mother, but I was in no danger. I wanted to get some red
berries for that young lady, but I could not find any.”

“You may have these,” replied his mother; “I do not want them;” and
while Norman went to give his berries and flowers to the young lady,
with whom he had had many pleasant talks on the Planet, his mother
pressed the pretty spikes of purple flowers in her guidebook.

The English clergyman stayed that he might go around Lake Simcoe, of
which most of the passengers thought they had seen enough. It was dark
when they reached Toronto, and Norman did not see much, roused as he was
from a sound sleep, till he walked through the stately halls and parlors
of the Rossin House, and into his comfortable room.




                             CHAPTER XXII.
                          A SUNDAY IN TORONTO.

          What spell has o’er the populous city pass’d!
            The wonted current of its life is stay’d:
          Its sports, its gainful schemes, are earthward cast,
            As though their vileness were at once display’d;
          The roar of trade has ceased, and on the air
            Come holy songs, and solemn sounds of prayer.

                                        WILLIAM HOWITT.


A bright, clear, cool Sabbath! Perfect peace reigned in that city; not a
sound disturbed its quiet. All the stores closed; no riding or driving;
no groups of idle people congregated anywhere; clean quiet streets only
filled with people on their way to the house of God. It was a striking
contrast to many of our towns in the States, where multitudes of people
are riding and driving, buying and selling, crowding to the drinking
saloons, and in many other ways desecrating God’s holy day.

Mrs. Lester told Norman that she wished him to learn that beautiful
promise in the fifty-eighth chapter of Isaiah.

“If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on
my holy day; and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honorable; and shalt honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words.

“Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord; and I will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage
of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.”

“Mother,” said Norman, “people do not seem to mind traveling on Sunday.
Every one was surprised that you hurried from St. Paul, so as not to be
on board the boat on Sunday.”

“I think, my dear child, that those who fear God will keep his
commandments. And this commandment to keep holy the Sabbath-day was
spoken not only amid the thunders of Sinai, but amid the blissful
solitudes of Eden. Prophet after prophet warned the Sabbath-breaker of
coming woe, and promised blessings to those who remembered the Sabbath
to keep it holy. Listen to the beautiful promise God gives to those who
keep his Sabbaths: ‘Even unto them will I give in my house, and within
my walls, a place and a name better than of sons and daughters: I will
give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.’

“Just think of the things here promised, a home, a place in God’s house,
a position better than that even of sons and daughters, and a name never
to be forgotten. What a reward for the faithful and joyful keeping of
the Sabbath, in itself a happiness. But, Norman, read the seventh verse
of the same chapter, (Isaiah lvi,) and you will find more blessings
promised.”

Norman found the place and read:

“Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my
house of prayer: their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be
accepted upon mine altar.”

In the morning Norman and his mother, accompanied by Mr. Campbell, went
to the cathedral. It is a large handsome new church, and the grassy turf
around it, shaded by fine trees, gave a very pleasant aspect to the
entrance. As they stood near the door awaiting the pew-opener to show
them to seats, a lady in a large square pew in the corner invited them
in. It was very warm; the pew was under the gallery and closely
curtained, and the words of the unseen minister, as he began the
service, were inaudible. Mrs. Lester whispered to Mr. Campbell, “Had we
not better go somewhere where we can see and hear?”

With words of apology to the lady who had kindly offered them seats,
they left the pew, and were shown to another in the nave, the body of
the church. It was a new thing for Norman to hear prayers for Queen
Victoria and the Prince Consort, and all the royal family, instead of
the President of the United States.

Another thing showed him that he was in a foreign country. On the front
of the gallery, just above him, were a gilt lion and unicorn, with a
crown above them. The royal arms of England were in front of the pew of
Sir Edmund Head, the Governor General of Canada. The sermon was preached
by the curate, a slender young man, who was soon to go to Europe for his
health. After the service the two aids-de-camp of the Governor General,
in full uniform, waited for him at the church door, to attend him to his
carriage. He keeps up a sort of court, as the representative of royalty,
and his salary is $35,000.

After dinner Mrs. Lester, with Norman, went to see Dr. G., a Wesleyan
minister, once a fellow passenger across the Atlantic. His house is very
pleasantly situated, overlooking the pretty grounds of the normal
school, whose fine buildings are an ornament to the city. Once, many
years before, Mrs. Lester had taken tea with Mrs. G., and it was very
pleasant to renew an acquaintance made under very happy auspices. The
evening service in the Wesleyan churches did not begin till six, and
Mrs. G. asked Mrs. Lester to remain and go to the Adelaide church with
them. Mrs. Lester, however, found it necessary to return to the hotel,
and before she went Dr. G. showed her, from the top of the house, the
numerous churches whose spires adorn the fair city of Toronto.

They had a pleasant walk to their hotel, at the far end of the town; on
their way they passed several handsome churches, one situated in a sort
of court, the street terminating at the church. It was a pleasant
evening service at the Richmond-street church: a very large
congregation, hearty singing, and a good earnest sermon.

On passing the pretty Congregational church on the corner of Adelaide
and Bay streets, they walked in and found that the minister had just
begun his sermon on, “At midnight there was a cry heard, Behold the
Bridegroom cometh: go ye out to meet him.” The minister, with a strong
Scotch accent was saying, as they entered, “Who of you would be willing
to fix a time when you would be ready to hear that cry?” He spoke of the
stillness and solemnity of the hour—midnight silence and darkness, when
the slightest sound startles one; when the wind, or the rustling of a
branch against the window, often terrifies one when sitting alone or
suddenly awakened from sleep. What then will it be to hear the piercing
tones of that trumpet that will rouse the universe?

And then he said that that night might the cry sound to one who was
listening to him, that suddenly, in the still watches of the night, that
soul might be called to meet the Bridegroom. The morning would come; the
family assembled at breakfast would miss the absent one, and on going to
his room they would find only his lifeless remains; he would never meet
with them again on earth.

                 “Great God, is this our certain doom,
                   And are we still secure?
                 Still walking downward to the tomb,
                   And yet prepared no more?”




                             CHAPTER XXIII.
                         ONCE MORE AT NIAGARA.

              Flow on forever in thy glorious robe
              Of terror and of beauty. God has set
              His rainbow on thy forehead, and the clouds
              Mantled around thy feet.—MRS. SIGOURNEY.


Ontario was sleeping in the sunshine when they crossed it on Monday
morning.

“Is this an English or American fort?” asked Norman, as he looked at the
massive walls of Fort Niagara at the mouth of the river. “It is an
American fort,” said a young English officer, who stood near, “but we
will come down and take it soon.”

“Not so easily as you think,” replied Norman.

“Yes we will,” said the Lieutenant; “we will come down and take it, and
keep it too.”

“I don’t believe you will,” said Norman.

“We took it once,” rejoined the officer, “in the last war.”

“But you did not keep it,” Norman replied.

As Norman was going off the boat the Englishman said: “We will soon come
and annex the United States.”

From the boat to the cars, for the short ride to Clifton Station, there
is a superb view of the Queenstown Heights, and Brock’s monument rising
proudly on its grand pedestal.

The window of Mrs. Lester’s room, at the Clifton House, commanded a fine
view of the falls, so that they could be enjoyed even in the moments of
rest and dressing.

It was a lovely day, and the walk to Table Rock is probably the most
magnificent in the world, commanding as it does, through its entire
length, a noble view of both falls. The sunlight on the white foaming
water made it almost painful for the eyes to look upon.

They sat on Table Rock and looked down upon the dazzling beauty of those
falling waters so quaintly described by the French missionary, Father
Hennepin, who saw them in 1678. “A vast and prodigious cadence of water,
which falls down after a surprising and astonishing manner, insomuch
that the universe does not afford its parallel.”

They had a more extensive view of the rapids, in connection with the
falls, from the observatory of the house near Table Rock. Then they went
to the Pagoda, and after ascending several flights of stairs, entered a
small room containing a round table covered with white muslin. Norman
wondered why they had come, when the old man closed the window, and on
this white table was thrown a picture that the greatest painter of earth
cannot equal.

Soft and beautiful, a moving picture first of the American falls, t

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Praise of Shakespeare, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Praise of Shakespeare
       An English Anthology

Author: Various

Compiler: C. E. Hughes

Release Date: September 7, 2018 [EBook #57863]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRAISE OF SHAKESPEARE ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







Transcriber’s Notes: Words in italics in the original are surrounded
with _underscores_. Words in mixed case and all cap small caps are in
capital letters. Variations in spelling and hyphenation remain as in
the original. A row of asterisks represents a thought break. A row of
periods represents an ellipsis. Ellipses match the original. A complete
list of corrections follows the text.




THE PRAISE OF SHAKESPEARE




                             THE PRAISE OF

                              SHAKESPEARE


                         AN ENGLISH ANTHOLOGY


                              COMPILED BY

                             C. E. HUGHES


                           WITH A PREFACE BY

                              SIDNEY LEE


                             METHUEN & CO.
                         36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                                LONDON
                                 1904


    Death makes no conquest of this conqueror;
    For now he lives in fame, though not in life.

                                        RICHARD III., III. i. 87.


    Who is it that says most? which can say more
      Than this rich praise,—that you alone are you?
    In whose confine immured is the store
      Which should example where your equal grew.
    Lean penury within that pen doth dwell,
      That to his subject lends not some small glory;
    But he that writes of you, if he can tell
      That you are you, so dignifies his story;
    Let him but copy what in you is writ,
      Not making worse what nature made so clear,
    And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
      Making his style admired everywhere.

                                                   SONNET LXXXIV.




PREFACE


I believe this volume serves a useful purpose. It is the fruit of a
suggestion which I made to its compiler, Mr. Hughes, in the following
circumstances.

At the beginning of last year I engaged in controversy in the _Times_
newspaper with certain persons who laboured under the delusion that the
evidence of Shakespeare’s authorship of those plays and poems, which
for three centuries have been published as his, was inconclusive. In
defiance of the fact that the acknowledged work of Bacon, the prose
writer and philosopher, proves him to be incapable of writing verse
of genuine merit, some of my opponents held Bacon and no other to be
responsible for those manifestations of supreme poetic genius which
are associated with Shakespeare’s name. Other sceptics, of less raw
judgment, hesitated to commit themselves to this extravagance,—they
confined themselves to the slightly more plausible contention that the
facts recorded of Shakespeare by contemporaries were scanty, and that
his career was clothed in a mystery, which justified wild attempts at a
solution.

The whole of the sceptical argument ignored alike the results of
recent Shakespearean research and the elementary truths of Elizabethan
literary history. But confirmed sceptics are not easily convinced
of defects of knowledge. With especial emphasis did even the most
enlightened among those who declared their doubt in print, persist in
affirming that Shakespeare was unnoticed by his contemporaries, and
that his achievements failed to win reputation in his lifetime or in
the generations succeeding his death. It was that allegation, to a
greater degree than any other, which seemed to encourage the inference
that the received tradition of the Shakespearean authorship of the
plays needed revision.

The conjecture that Shakespeare lived and died unhonoured rests on no
foundation of fact. The converse alone is true. Shakespeare’s eminence
was fully acknowledged by his contemporaries, and their acknowledgments
have long been familiar to scholars.

Yet the reiterated assertion that Shakespeare’s contemporaries left
on record no recognition of his worth, proved that information on the
subject was narrowly diffused, and that public intelligence suffered
by the strait limits as yet assigned to the distribution of genuine
knowledge of the topic. I suggested to Mr. Hughes that he should
remedy this defect by collecting in a volume that might be generally
accessible all notices of Shakespeare which were penned in early days.

Subsequently, when I considered the scheme in detail, I deemed it wise
for Mr. Hughes to enlarge its scope so that the volume might form a
contribution to the history of opinion respecting Shakespeare of no
single period, but of all periods from the earliest to the present
day. Thereby the force and persistence of that Shakespearean tradition
which ignorance had lately impugned might be rendered plainer, and the
liability to misconception might be to a greater degree diminished.
The fulfilment of the design on the extended scale might also, I
thought, give the work some value as a chart of æsthetic development
through the ages. Students of Shakespeare who in the course of three
centuries have recorded their impressions of him, include men and
women of varying degrees of intellectual capacity, and the orderly
presentation of their views could not fail to illustrate with some
graphic force the working of the law of taste in literature.

A further justification for the compilation of the work on an
exhaustive scale, lies in the fact that it has not been done already.
Charles Knight seems to be the only writer who has hitherto attempted
any sketch of a general history of opinion respecting Shakespeare. His
essay formed part of his _Studies of Shakespeare_, which were first
published in 1849, and it was reissued separately as the first volume
of a new edition of his Cabinet Edition of _Shakespeare_ which was
published in London by William S. Orr & Co., of Paternoster Row, in
1851.[vii:1] Knight surveys his subject somewhat perfunctorily from
Edmund Spenser to Coleridge. He devotes much space to the eighteenth
century, but he pays scant attention to the nineteenth, and he is far
from exhaustive in his treatment of earlier periods. Commendable as is
his pioneer effort, it is now, alike in form and matter, largely out of
date.

A more imposing endeavour was made later to deal with the earlier
section of the topic. Dr. Ingleby, a Shakespearean scholar of repute,
issued in 1874 the work entitled _Shakespeare’s Centurie of Prayse_,
in which he dealt with the period extending from the year 1591, when
Shakespeare first came into notice as a dramatist, until 1693. A
second edition of Dr. Ingleby’s volume, revised and enlarged by Miss
Toulmin Smith, appeared five years later under the auspices of the
New Shakspere Society. A very substantial supplement to this volume,
called _Some 300 Fresh Allusions to Shakspere from 1594 to 1694_, was
edited by Dr. Furnivall for the New Shakspere Society in 1886. Thus the
_Centurie of Prayse_ in its final shape extends to 912 pages in quarto.
The large book is not at everybody’s disposal, but its contents, as far
as they go, are very valuable, and no Shakespeare library is complete
without it. None the less, it covers less than a third part of that
field which a full history of opinion about Shakespeare ought to
occupy; it leaves ample room for a treatise on the whole subject.

The general impression produced by Mr. Hughes’s extended survey seems
creditable to the discernment of the English literary public—of
all generations since Shakespeare began to write. The repute that
Shakespeare acquired in his lifetime, though it was rarely defined
with subtlety, was in spirit all that judicious admirers could desire.
The contemporary estimate was authoritatively summed up in the epitaph
which was inscribed on his monument in Stratford-on-Avon church soon
after his death. In that inscription he was hailed as the equal of
great heroes of classical antiquity—of Nestor in wisdom, of Socrates
in genius, of Virgil in literary art; he was acknowledged in plain
terms to be the greatest of contemporary writers; all living writers
were declared to be worthy only to serve him as pages or menials.
Shakespeare’s epitaph, the significance of which is not always
appreciated, justifies no doubt of the supremacy that he enjoyed in
the English world of letters of his own day. The homage of literary
contemporaries was confirmed without faltering and in finer phrase by
Milton, the next occupant of the throne of English letters.

No subsequent change of literary taste or literary fashion in England
really dimmed Shakespeare’s fame. In the days of the Restoration,
Dryden humbly acknowledged discipleship to him. Some censure he
suffered from thoughtless lips; but the right to the rank of a classic,
which had been granted him as soon as the breath left his body, was
never effectually disputed. The formal critics of the eighteenth
century sought to show that much of his work deviated from formal
standards or from rules of formal art. But these censors gave him the
worship of incessant study. They edited and annotated his writings,
with the result that a succeeding generation of readers acquired a
more accurate comprehension of his work than was possible before.
The triumphal progress of Shakespeare’s reputation was stimulated by
eighteenth century research and criticism to a quicker pace.

The critical faculty of the nation was especially acute and sagacious
at the opening of the nineteenth century, and Shakespeare’s
pre-eminence was then seen in sharper outline and in fuller grandeur
than at any earlier epoch. The sympathetic intuition of three early
nineteenth century critics—Coleridge, Lamb, and Hazlitt—remains
unsurpassed. But there has been no trace of retrogression in the wise
and reasoned enthusiasm of later generations of the reading public.

The history of Shakespeare’s fame is indeed that of a flowing tide; the
ebbing was never long enough sustained to give it genuine importance;
the forward march was never seriously impeded, and is from start
to finish the commanding feature of the chronicle. If Mr. Hughes’s
endeavour succeed in impressing that pregnant fact on the public mind,
a perilous source of popular misconception regarding Shakespeare’s true
place in English literary history will be removed.

                                                      SIDNEY LEE.


FOOTNOTES:

[vii:1] This volume bore the title, _Studies of Shakspere: introductory
volume, containing A History of Opinion on the Writings of Shakspere;
with the Chronology of his Plays_. The book in this form seems now to
be difficult of access. No copy of it is in the British Museum Library.
I acquired a copy for a few pence many years ago.




CONTENTS


                                                                PAGE
    PREFACE BY SIDNEY LEE                                          v
    SOME NOTES ON SHAKESPEARE’S REPUTATION                         1


    PART I

    “THESE THREE HUNDRED YEARS”


    THE FIRST PERIOD

           1596  Francis Meres                                    35
           1598  Richard Barnfield                                36
           1599  John Weever                                      37
           1610  John Davies                                      38
           1614  Thomas Freeman                                   39
           1622  William Basse                                    40
           1623  Anonymous                                        41
           1623  Ben Jonson                                       42
           1623  Hugh Holland                                     45
           1623  John Heminge and Henrie Condell                  46
           1623  Leonard Digges                                   47
           1627  Michael Drayton                                  48
           1630  John Milton                                      49
           1632  I. M. S.                                         50
    _a._   1633  John Hales                                       53
           1637  Sir William D’Avenant                            54
    _c._   1637  Anonymous                                        55
           1639  Thomas Bancroft                                  57
           1647  George Daniel                                    58
           1651  Samuel Sheppard                                  59
    _c._   1661  Thomas Fuller                                    61
         1662-7  Samuel Pepys                                     62
           1664  Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle         64
           1667  John Dryden                                      66
           1668  John Dryden                                      67
           1672  Anonymous                                        69
           1675  Edward Phillips                                  71
           1680  Thomas Otway                                     72
           1681  “A Person of Honour”                             74
           1693  Sir Charles Sedley                               75


    THE SECOND PERIOD

           1709  Sir Richard Steele                               76
           1709  Nicholas Rowe                                    78
           1711  Elijah Fenton                                    80
           1712  John Dennis                                      82
           1712  Edward Young                                     83
           1714  Joseph Addison                                   84
           1725  Alexander Pope                                   85
           1727  James Thomson                                    88
           1733  Lewis Theobald                                   89
           1740  Joseph Warton                                    91
           1743  William Collins                                  92
           1744  Sir Thomas Hanmer                                93
           1747  Samuel Johnson                                   94
           1747  Bishop William Warburton                         95
           1751  Christopher Smart                                96
           1754  David Hume                                       97
           1756  Horace Walpole                                   99
           1758  John Armstrong                                  100
           1759  William Mason                                   101
           1759  Thomas Gray                                     102
           1759  David Mallet                                    103
           1759  Edward Young                                    104
    _c._   1760  Mark Akenside                                   105
           1760  Robert Lloyd                                    106
           1760  Edward Capell                                   107
           1761  Charles Churchill                               108
           1762  William Whitehead                               109
           1763  William Thompson                                110
           1765  Samuel Johnson                                  111
           1768  George Keate                                    112
           1769  David Garrick                                   113
           1769  Anonymous                                       116
           1774  William Richardson                              117
           1775  William Julius Mickle                           119
           1777  William Hayley                                  120
           1777  Thomas Warton                                   121
    _a._   1782  Anna Seward                                     123
           1794  William Lisle Bowles                            124


    THE THIRD PERIOD

           1802  William Wordsworth                              127
           1804  Felicia Dorothea Hemans                         128
           1814  Sir Walter Scott                                129
           1817  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         130
           1817  Francis, Lord Jeffrey                           133
           1818  William Hazlitt                                 135
    _c._   1818  John Keats                                      138
    _c._   1818  John Keats                                      138
           1819  John Wilson                                     140
           1824  Charles Sprague                                 142
           1824  Charles Lamb                                    144
           1827  Julius Charles Hare                             145
           1831  James Hogg                                      146
           1833  Charles Lamb                                    148
           1833  Hartley Coleridge                               149
           1838  Thomas de Quincey                               150
           1839  John Sterling                                   153
           1839  Henry Hallam                                    155
           1840  —— Johnstone                                    156
           1840  Thomas Carlyle                                  157
           1841  William Wordsworth                              159
           1843  Lord Macaulay                                   160
           1844  Ralph Waldo Emerson                             162
           1850  Frederick William Robertson                     164
           1851  Leigh Hunt                                      166
           1852  James Anthony Froude                            167
           1853  David Masson                                    168
           1853  Matthew Arnold                                  169
           1853  Walter Savage Landor                            170
           1858  John Henry Newman                               171
    _c._   1858  James Russell Lowell                            173
           1863  Nathaniel Hawthorne                             175
           1864  Bishop Charles Wordsworth                       176
           1864  Oliver Wendell Holmes                           177
           1865  Cardinal Wiseman                                179
           1865  Archbishop Trench                               180
           1865  Francis Turner Palgrave                         181
           1866  Frances Anne Kemble                             183
           1868  John Ruskin                                     184
           1871  Dante Gabriel Rossetti                          185
           1872  Bayard Taylor                                   186
           1874  William Minto                                   189
           1875  Edward Dowden                                   190
           1877  George Meredith                                 191
           1877  Frederick James Furnivall                       192
           1878  Walter Horatio Pater                            193
           1879  Matthew Arnold                                  195
  ? _c._   1880  Anonymous                                       197
           1880  Algernon Charles Swinburne                      199
           1882  Algernon Charles Swinburne                      201
           1883  George Meredith                                 202
           1884  Robert Browning                                 204
           1886  William Wetmore Story                           205
           1886  Thomas Spencer Baynes                           207
           1888  Gerald Massey                                   209
           1890  Walt Whitman                                    210
           1891  Richard Watson Gilder                           212
    _c._   1894  Mathilde Blind                                  213
    _a._   1892  Alfred, Lord Tennyson                           214
           1899  Sidney Lee                                      215


    PART II

    “GOOD SENTENCES”

           1639  Anonymous                                       219
           1681  John Crowne                                     220
           1737  Alexander Pope                                  221
           1745  James Thomson                                   222
           1767  Anonymous                                       223
    _a._   1767  George Colman                                   224
           1776  Richard Graves                                  225
           1778  Horace Walpole                                  226
           1787  Daniel Webb                                     227
           1801  William Lisle Bowles                            228
           1807  Felicia Dorothea Hemans                         229
           1811  Francis, Lord Jeffrey                           230
           1811  George Dyer                                     231
           1812  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         232
           1813  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         232
           1817  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         232
           1817  Leigh Hunt                                      233
           1818  William Hazlitt                                 234
           1818  Percy Bysshe Shelley                            235
           1819  John Keats                                      236
           1821  William Hazlitt                                 237
           1821  Robert Southey                                  238
           1821  Lord Byron                                      239
           1822  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         240
           1827  Thomas Hood                                     241
           1828  Thomas Carlyle                                  242
           1830  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         243
           1830  Anonymous                                       244
           1831  Lord Macaulay                                   245
           1834  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         246
           1836  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         246
           1837  Leigh Hunt                                      247
           1838  Thomas de Quincey                               248
           1839  Thomas de Quincey                               248
           1839  Thomas Carlyle                                  249
           1844  Leigh Hunt                                      250
           1844  Ralph Waldo Emerson                             251
           1844  Elizabeth Barrett Browning                      252
    _a._   1846  Walter Savage Landor                            253
           1847  Thomas de Quincey                               254
           1850  Robert Browning                                 255
    _a._   1850  William Wordsworth                              256
    _a._   1851  David Macbeth Moir                              257
           1851  Thomas Lovell Beddoes                           258
           1853  Edward Bulwer, Lord Lytton                      259
           1857  Charles Mackay                                  260
    _c._   1860  Abraham Lincoln                                 261
           1860  Ralph Waldo Emerson                             262
           1865  Cardinal Wiseman                                263
           1867  Thomas Carlyle                                  264
           1867  Matthew Arnold                                  265
           1870  James Russell Lowell                            266
           1875  Edward Dowden                                   267
           1879  Matthew Arnold                                  268
           1882  Dante Gabriel Rossetti                          269
           1884  William Watson                                  270
           1893  Richard Green Moulton                           271
           1894  Sir John Robert Seeley                          272
           1896  John Ruskin                                     273


    PART III

    “ROUND ABOUT”

           1664  Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle        277
           1711  Joseph Addison                                  278
           1743  Henry Fielding                                  279
           1747  Thomas Edwards                                  281
           1749  Mark Akenside                                   284
           1751  Robert Lloyd                                    288
           1765  Oliver Goldsmith                                291
           1765  George, Lord Lyttelton                          292
           1768  Laurence Sterne                                 295
           1769  Anonymous                                       298
           1769  Isaac Bickerstaff                               299
           1778  Anonymous                                       302
           1788  Horace Walpole                                  305
           1790  Paul Whitehead                                  306
           1812  William Combe                                   308
           1826  Charles Lamb                                    313
           1845  Nathaniel Hawthorne                             314
           1846  Walter Savage Landor                            316
           1868  William Schwenck Gilbert                        318
           1872  Oliver Wendell Holmes                           323
           1897  Theodore Watts-Dunton                           325
           1902  Judge Willis                                    326

                 To My Very Good Friend, Mr William Shakespeare  329

                 INDEX                                           331




SOME NOTES ON SHAKESPEARE’S REPUTATION


I

INTRODUCTORY

This book provides a chronological sequence of the best pieces in verse
and prose which the best writers in successive periods have written
in praise of Shakespeare, and thereby aims at presenting, as it were,
an index to the standard of estimation in which Shakespeare has been
held at any given point of time. Thus, as an anthology, it differs in
various respects from other anthologies. An anthology, as a rule, hopes
to confine itself to pieces of literature intrinsically valuable. The
conscientious compiler of an ordinary anthology includes nothing which,
according to his own canons of taste, can be considered of doubtful
merit. His choice may not always be approved by others—it frequently
is not; but he, at least, is satisfied. Here, however, is a different
case. My object has been to collect what may be called materials for a
history of opinion of Shakespeare, so that as many years as might be
of the three centuries and more, which have elapsed since Shakespeare’s
reputation was born, had to be represented. With these conditions it
has not always been possible to exclude bad pieces, for the obvious
reason that there has been at times a dearth of good writers. In such
cases the best has been given that could be found. The best has at
times been deplorably mediocre, but the scheme was inexorable.

The labour of selection has been guided by one or two principles.
In the first place, complete poems, or extracts in verse and prose,
which relate solely to Shakespeare have been taken in preference to
those which mention him in company with his contemporaries. Secondly,
passages that exhibit unusual characteristics, whether good or bad,
have frequently been chosen. For some of the poor pieces, and I hope
they are not many, something may be said. Though their writers are
practically forgotten to-day, they were considered great during their
own lives; so their productions have at least a historical value. If,
then, this volume includes, as I think it does, the best things that
have been written about Shakespeare, it includes also many things
that in a comparative estimate of the whole must be considered as
second-rate, though they happened to be the best in the period during
which they were produced. The distinctiveness of the book may perhaps
be indicated in this way. An ordinary anthology may be said to gather
into a garland the choicest flowers from various fields of literature;
this anthology claims to be little more than a collection of botanical
specimens.


II

DIVISION INTO PERIODS

The history of opinion of Shakespeare may be divided into three
periods, represented broadly by the seventeenth, eighteenth, and
nineteenth centuries. Definite limits cannot be assigned to these three
periods. Epochs of literary history must be determined ultimately,
not by the work produced in them, or by the lives of the producers,
but by the influences which gradually brought them into being. Thus,
there must always be at the beginning and end of a period of literary
history a kind of dovetailing with it of the periods before and after.
Still, the three periods I have indicated are reasonably distinct.
The first begins with the earliest mention of Shakespeare in print,
and may be taken to end with the death of Dryden. The second period
was largely affected by Dryden’s influence, and thus may be said to
begin with the eighteenth century. And the last period, which is due
to the reaction from the Augustan age of English literature, may be
fairly dated from the beginning of the nineteenth century. The style
of the literary products of these three centuries respectively goes to
confirm the division. The first period is that of personal knowledge
and oral tradition, and tributes to Shakespeare are for the most part
in verse. It is the period during which his historical position was in
the making. The second period is that of critics and emendators—the
period when people begin to realise that there is some great power in
Shakespeare’s work which finds no parallel in their own time, and must
therefore be praised blindly, accounted for, or explained away. Tribute
is clothed equally in verse and prose; it is, in short, the period of
doubt and astonishment. The last period is that of æsthetic criticism,
and tribute is mostly in prose. Shakespeare’s position is an accepted
fact.

Of the three periods, the second is by far the most interesting to the
literary historian. Opinion of Shakespeare during the first period
was to a large extent prejudiced by personal knowledge and tradition.
The praise is practically equivalent to that of friends; which is to
say, it is largely that of blind admiration. In the third period it
is open-eyed, intelligent admiration. The matter has been sifted. The
question of Shakespeare’s genius is no longer a debatable point. The
praise is that of disciples who appreciate the logical basis of their
master’s teaching, and who see the necessity of lucid explanation
for the purpose of adding recruits to their number. But the second
period is the time of trial. Shakespeare’s title to fame is weighed
judicially, and is not found wanting.


III

THE FIRST PERIOD

Of the seventeenth century not much need be said, and, indeed, not
much that is new can be said. The labours of the New Shakspere Society
have added several valuable volumes to the literature relating to
Shakespeare’s reputation during that period. Of these the _Centurie of
Prayse_ (of which the second and much enlarged edition was produced
under the direction of Miss L. Toulmin Smith in 1879) brought together
a very large number of allusions to Shakespeare both in print and
manuscript, and these were supplemented by _Some 300 Fresh Allusions_,
a work which was edited by Dr. Furnivall in 1886. These volumes display
an amazing amount of diligent research, and few additions can be made
to their contents. Seven hitherto unnoticed allusions to Shakespeare
were discovered by Dr. Edward J. L. Scott in the Sloane Manuscripts
at the British Museum, and communicated by him to the _Athenæum_
on 5th March 1898.[5:1] This evidence of Shakespeare’s reputation
during the period under discussion has been ably supplemented by an
article entitled _Shakespeare in Oral Tradition_, which Mr. Sidney
Lee contributed to the _Nineteenth Century_ in January 1902. This
traces the actual recollection of Shakespeare by his friends and their
descendants, from his personal acquaintance among the actors and the
townsfolk of Stratford-on-Avon, to the reminiscences transmitted
by word of mouth from Betterton to Nicholas Rowe, the poet’s first
biographer. Mr. Lee’s paper is of the utmost importance. As he
points out, “It was obviously the free circulation of the fame of
Shakespeare’s work which stimulated the activity of interest in his
private fortunes, and led to the chronicling of the oral tradition
regarding them. It could easily be shown that outside the circle
of professional poets, dramatists, actors, and fellow-townsmen,
Shakespeare’s name was, from his first coming into public notice,
constantly on the lips of scholars, statesmen, and men of fashion who
had any glimmer of literary taste.”

The ground, therefore, may be said to be covered in so far as positive
evidence of Shakespeare’s fame in the seventeenth century is concerned.
But at least three popular fallacies have come into being, and it
will be perhaps worth while to state them and definitely refute them.
Their existence is due partly to lack of acquaintance with documentary
evidence, and partly to misconception.

One of these popular fallacies is that Shakespeare practically vanished
from the minds of his countrymen when he retired from the stage; and
that what reputation he had in his lifetime was due to his prominence
as an actor, rather than to his genius as a poet.

The preface of the First Folio (1623) is enough to prove that this was
not the case. The tone of the address “to the great variety of readers”
is not that of publishers trying to awaken interest in a forgotten
personage, by calling attention to works that used to be popular. The
language is that of affectionate friends, the references to Shakespeare
those of intimate associates whose memories have not healed of the
wound inflicted by his death. It was addressed to the public, not with
the diffidence that is born of anxiety lest the subject of eulogy
should meet with an indifferent welcome, but with the confidence that
is inspired by friendship with a great man who is recognised as a
great man.

The second impression of the Folio appeared in 1632, and the spirit of
enthusiasm that breathes through the preliminary matter—the publisher’s
preface and the various sets of verses—has become in no way weakened.
The volume contains, indeed, two of the finest poems of direct personal
eulogy that have ever been written—that signed I. M. S., and attributed
by Coleridge somewhat fancifully to no less a person than John Milton,
and the noble _Epitaph on the admirable Dramatic Poet, W. Shakespeare_,
actually written by Milton in 1630. No sign of decayed reputation
here. Nor elsewhere. King Charles I., it is well known, read
Shakespeare. Copies of his plays and poems are mentioned in Prince
Rupert’s library catalogue. His works were given on the stage, and
formed topics of everyday discussion. One might multiply examples of
his popularity, but it is striking at shadows.

Another popular error has tinged the traditional notion of Milton’s
attitude to Shakespeare. It is supposed that his opinion of Shakespeare
underwent a complete change from that exhibited in the lines mentioned
above. The error that attributes to Milton this surprising revulsion
of feeling is due to a misconception of a certain passage in his
_Eikonoklastes_. Milton wrote thus:

    “Andronicus Comnenus, the Byzantine emperor, though a most
    cruel tyrant, is reported by Nicetas to have been a most
    constant reader of Saint Paul’s Epistles; and by continual
    study had so incorporated the phrase and style of that
    transcendent apostle into all his familiar letters, that the
    imitation seemed to vie with the original. Yet this availed
    not to deceive the people of that empire, who, notwithstanding
    his saint’s vizard, tore him to pieces for his tyranny. From
    stories of this nature, both ancient and modern, which abound,
    the poets also, and some English, have been in this point so
    mindful of decorum as to put never more pious words in the
    mouth of any person than of a tyrant. I shall not instance an
    abstruse author, wherein the king might be less conversant, but
    one whom we well know was the closet companion of these his
    solitudes, William Shakespeare, who introduces the person of
    Richard the Third, speaking in as high a strain of piety and
    mortification as is uttered in any passage of this book [_i.e._
    the _Eikon Basilike_], and sometimes to the same sense and
    purpose with some words in this place: ‘I intended,’ saith he,
    ‘not only to oblige to my friends, but my enemies.’ The like
    saith Richard, Act II. Scene i.:

        “‘I do not know that Englishman alive
          With whom my soul is any jot at odds,
          More than the infant that is born to-night:
          I thank my God for my humility.’

    Other stuff of this sort may be read throughout the whole
    tragedy, wherein the poet used not much licence in departing
    from the truth of history, which delivers him a deep
    dissembler, not of his affections only, but of religion.”

The blundering interpretation of this passage, which Warton accepted
and transmitted to his successors, including De Quincey, is that
Charles I. was reproved by Milton for having made Shakespeare
his closet companion. “The Prince of Wales (afterwards Charles
I.),” says De Quincey in his _Life of Shakespeare_, “had
learned to appreciate Shakespeare, not originally from reading him, but
from witnessing the Court representations of his plays at Whitehall.
Afterwards we know that he made Shakespeare his closet companion,
for he was reproached with doing so by Milton.” A careful perusal
of the passage will show that nothing was farther from Milton’s
intention. Such a deduction is logically impossible. Three things,
however, undoubtedly may be deduced from it; and they not only bear
a significance directly opposed to the erroneous interpretation, but
they are of the highest importance as positive evidence of Milton’s
appreciation of Shakespeare, and of Shakespeare’s literary fame. One
may deduce, firstly, that Shakespeare was known, at any rate by name,
to the Puritans, who chiefly composed the public for which Milton was
writing. Secondly (since Charles was not, we may believe, the man to
read in private books that he did not like), that the king’s knowledge
of Shakespeare was intimate and his appreciation sincere. And, thirdly,
that Shakespeare was, in Milton’s opinion, one who depicts human nature
with accuracy. For, consider the force of the parallel. Milton wrote
to show that the deeds of monarchs are not always the substantiation
of their words. The Byzantine tyrant, with his mouth full of piety, is
cited as one instance; Shakespeare’s Richard III. as being, by
familiarity, likely to bring the matter home to Charles, is cited as
another. Which is, in effect, that Shakespeare’s portrayal of a king
of such character is, in Milton’s opinion, proof that such a king may
exist. There is nothing slighting about that. It is high praise.

Milton wrote his _Eikonoklastes_ in 1649, when he was forty-one. In
1645 he had written his _L’Allegro_, with the lines:

    “Then to the well-trod stage anon
     If Jonson’s learned sock be on,
     Or sweetest Shakespeare fancy’s child,
     Warble his native woodnotes wild.”

The lines attributed to him in the Second Folio had appeared in 1632,
and his fully authenticated _Epitaph_ in 1630. Further, his influence
has been traced in the notice of Shakespeare which appeared in the
_Theatrum Poetarum_, published in 1675 by Edward Phillips, Milton’s
nephew. Here, surely, is sufficient evidence that throughout his life
Milton’s early enthusiasm for Shakespeare did not diminish.

A third popular fallacy is that which maintains Shakespeare’s
reputation to have been at its lowest ebb after the Restoration. This
belief is well expressed in Victor Hugo’s _Shakespeare_.

    “Shakespeare,” says Victor Hugo, “once dead entered into
    oblivion. Under the Restoration he ‘completed his eclipse.’
    He was so thoroughly dead that Davenant, possibly his son,
    recomposed his pieces. There was no longer any _Macbeth_ but
    the _Macbeth_ of Davenant. Dryden speaks of Shakespeare on
    one occasion in order to say that he is ‘out of date.’ Lord
    Shaftesbury calls him ‘a wit out of fashion’ . . .

    “These two men having condemned Shakespeare, the oracle had
    spoken. England, a country more obedient to conventional
    opinion than is generally believed, forgot Shakespeare. Some
    purchaser pulled down his house, New Place. A Rev. Dr. Gastrell
    cut down and burnt his mulberry-tree.[10:1] At the commencement
    of the eighteenth century the eclipse was total. In 1707 one
    called Nahum Tate published a _King Lear_, warning his readers
    ‘that he had borrowed the idea of it from a play which he
    had read by chance, the work of some nameless author.’ This
    ‘nameless author’ was Shakespeare.”

Now the numerous adaptations of Shakespeare’s plays which appeared
after the Restoration have been taken somewhat paradoxically as
indicative of his decline in the public estimation. Such a deduction is
by no means accurate. If we take into consideration the comparatively
low level to which imaginative literature had fallen under the
influence of Charles II.’s Court, the wonder is perhaps that
the theatre-going public should have received Shakespeare in any form.
Such neglect of Shakespeare as is seen at this time is attributable
merely to change of fashion in popular literature, and that was then,
and still is, as mutable as the sea. Popular literature does not live,
and the adaptations of the later Stuart reigns are now known only to
curious students. But Shakespeare lived through it all, known and
appreciated by all who had souls above the vulgar; and in this very
period he passed triumphantly his first examination at the hands of a
skilled critic, John Dryden. Dryden was in every respect typical of the
cultivated class of his period. His early judgment of Shakespeare was
formed in the somewhat flickering light of Restoration taste. His final
estimate was that of a matured thinker. Certainly, adaptations prepared
to suit the fickle taste of the playgoer of the period cannot be said
to reflect the true character of Shakespeare’s reputation. We see the
same thing at the present day. The altruism of theatrical managers
is compelled to make concessions to popular demands. The public are
still rather shy of going to see Shakespeare simply as Shakespeare.
They appear to feel that going to see a play of Shakespeare is like
sacrificing themselves for their own good. So the managers who gild
the pill for them are successful, and those who do not merely fail,
or at best earn a precarious livelihood. One might as well say that
Shakespeare’s reputation is at a very low ebb to-day, as make the
deduction from the fact of the Restoration adaptations. The playgoers
of that period wanted something piquant. One may suppose—to put the
matter in modern terms—that Heine and De Maupassant collaborating might
have produced a popular success. Wycherley and Congreve met the demand
as nearly as possible. But Shakespeare was not the thing.


IV

THE SECOND PERIOD

I have taken 1700, the date of Dryden’s death, as that which most
fittingly marks the close of the first period and the beginning of
the second, for it is very soon after that year that the spirit of
the eighteenth century begins to make itself manifest. In the history
of literature the eighteenth century stands out distinct as a whole.
The literature of the seventeenth century had many characteristics,
which, even in the most cursory survey, require attention, and these
characteristics were mainly due to the connection of literature with
the Court. The pedantic James I. was a patron of learning. His son
Charles I., and grandson Charles II., inherited the taste for polite
letters, and encouraged or influenced indirectly the authors of their
times. But the eighteenth century monarchs were different. They did
not concern themselves much with men of letters, and literature went
its course comparatively unaffected by fashion. But it was affected
by the spirit of the age—the spirit born of gradual recognition of
the Renaissance. As David Lloyd in his _State Worthies_ said of the
early seventeenth century, “it was the very guise at that time to be
learned; the wits of it were so excellent, the helps and assistants of
it were so great; printing was so common; the world (by navigation)
so open; great experiments so disclosed; the leisure of men so much,
the age so peaceable; and His Majesty, after whom all writ, so
knowing.” At that time learning was a novelty, and consequently it was
fashionable—it was “the very guise.” By the eighteenth century great
men had grown accustomed to it; and it was becoming the property of
the lesser worthies, who, unable to resist the temptation to “show
off,” turned out reams of didactic verse, the substance of which would
nowadays hide its light beneath the respectable bushel of the journal
of some scientific society. Dryden was perhaps mainly responsible.
He had pronounced the dictum: “They cannot be good poets who are not
accustomed to argue well.” At any rate, with the eighteenth century the
poetry of argument or logic, as distinct from that of inspiration, came
into being, and by far the greater part of the poetry of the hundred
years that followed Dryden’s death was that of poets who are made
rather than poets who are born. The same feeling informs the prose.
It is true that the age produced Horace Walpole. But Walpole was a
literary trifler, and liked to be thought so, though he was amazingly
industrious. The eighteenth century saw much excellent prose, but it is
almost always the prose of “will” or “must” rather than that of “can.”
It comes rather of fertility of reason than of fertility of fancy. Of
such stock are commentators born.

One finds, accordingly, that the principal producers of pure
literature, whether prose or verse, were also critics, and most of them
turned their attention, sooner or later, to Shakespeare. Prominent
figures in the history of Shakespearean criticism in the eighteenth
century stand Pope and Johnson. Both are classical scholars in an age
of pedants; both are among the foremost advocates of rigid adherence
to prescribed rules in literary production; both place imagination
below intellect in estimation of genius; and both are honoured by
their fellows as arbiters and dictators of literary taste. Each of
them is inclined to say unkind things about Shakespeare, and hardly
dares. Pope is the more generous of the two. “It will be,” he says,
“but fair to allow that most of our author’s faults are less to be
ascribed to his wrong judgment as a poet, than to his right judgment
as a player.” Which is to say, that Shakespeare, poor soul! must needs
trim his boat to suit the current of popular opinion; that the greater
part of his audience in the theatres consisted of low fellows who had
never heard of Aristotle, and must not be troubled with the unities and
such matters, which they could not understand. One has but to continue
this line of argument to conclude that Pope thought Shakespeare so
much a part and product of the age in which he was born, that had
he been born, say, in Pope’s age, he might (which Heaven forbid!)
have been a perfect poet according to Pope’s lights—might, in fact,
have translated Homer, to supply the sixpenny boxes of second-hand
booksellers two centuries later. But Pope certainly thought Shakespeare
very great. His greatness was, perhaps, not of quite the right kind
in Pope’s estimation; but greatness he undoubtedly thought it. As to
Shakespeare’s want of learning, Pope frankly refused to believe in it.
He says very wisely:

    “There is certainly a vast difference between _learning_ and
    _languages_. How far he was ignorant of the latter I cannot
    determine; but ’tis plain he had much reading at least, if they
    will not call it learning. Nor is it any great matter, if a
    man has knowledge, whether he has it from one language or from
    another. . . . I am inclined to think this opinion proceeded
    originally from the zeal of the partizans of our author and Ben
    Jonson, as they endeavoured to exalt the one at the expense of
    the other. It is ever the nature of parties to be in extremes;
    and nothing is so probable as that because Ben Jonson had much
    the more learning, it was said on the one hand that Shakespeare
    had none at all; and because Shakespeare had much the most wit
    and fancy, it was reported on the other that Jonson wanted
    both. Because Shakespeare borrowed nothing, it was said that
    Ben Jonson borrowed everything. Because Jonson did not write
    extempore, he was reproached with being a year about every
    piece; and because Shakespeare wrote with ease and rapidity,
    they cried, he never once made a blot. Nay, the spirit of
    opposition ran so high, that whatever those of the one side
    objected to in the other, was taken at the rebound and turned
    into praises; as injudiciously as their antagonists before had
    made them objections.”

Pope further attributed many of Shakespeare’s errors to the
carelessness or ignorance of the first publishers of his works,
suggesting that the original copies from which they were printed were
no better than the “_prompter’s book_, or _piecemeal parts_ written out
for the use of the actors,” who may be supposed to have made numerous
small excisions and additions.

Thus Pope says in effect that Shakespeare would have been perfect if
the age and conditions in which he lived had allowed him. He sees many
beauties in him, but he also sees many defects; and his edition of
Shakespeare’s works is remarkable chiefly for its omissions of passages
which the editor deems unworthy of his author.

Dr. Johnson is by no means so ready metaphorically to grasp Shakespeare
by the hand. He follows a procession of editors of more or less
ability, and he feels that the time has come for the final settlement
of Shakespeare’s true position. Rowe, the first editor, hardly realised
his responsibilities, and his edition of the plays which appeared
in 1709 has few merits from the critic’s point of view. Pope, who
followed him in 1725, had a reputation for brilliance to sustain,
and his preface is remarkable rather for neatness of expression
than for critical discernment. Theobald came after Pope, in 1733,
with much common sense, which made him the laughing-stock of his
successors. The next editor, Sir Thomas Hanmer, intended his edition
as a tribute to Shakespeare, and what was lacking in criticism was
supplied in good paper and printing. Warburton succeeded with a pompous
self-assertiveness that expressed itself in amusing but ineffective
paradoxes.

Johnson accordingly had a due sense of what was expected of him. His
critical equipment consisted in a knowledge of the classical drama,
and his æsthetic judgment was founded on the rules by which he had
succeeded in his own poetical ventures. Still, he did his best to
assume a strictly unbiassed judicial attitude. He did not, as Macaulay
states, take it for granted that “the kind of poetry which flourished
in his own time, which he had been accustomed to hear praised from
his childhood, and which he had himself written with success, was the
best kind of poetry.” He tried deliberately to approach Shakespeare
as he approached the Cock Lane Ghost. He dealt with him as with some
mysterious phenomenon which was attracting public attention, and which
admitted of explanation. The result was, perhaps, the best balanced
common-sense judgment on record. It contained, on the one hand, the
most tremendous indictment of Shakespeare that is ever likely to be
written; and, on the other, a triumphant defence, coupled with much
enthusiastic eulogy. Here are some of the “faults which,” as he puts
it, “are sufficient to obscure and overwhelm any other merit”:

    “He sacrifices virtue to convenience.”

    “His plots are often so loosely formed that a very slight
    consideration may improve them.”

    “In many of his plays the latter part is evidently neglected.”

    “He had no regard to distinction of time or place.”

    “In his comic scenes he is seldom very successful when he
    engages his characters in reciprocations of smartness and
    contests of sarcasm.”

    “In tragedy his performance seems constantly to be worse, as
    his labour is more.”

    “In narration he affects a disproportionate pomp of diction and
    a wearisome train of circumlocution, and tells the incident
    imperfectly in many words, which might have been more plainly
    delivered in few.”

    “His declamations or set speeches are commonly cold and weak.”

    “It is incident to him to be now and then entangled with an
    unwieldy sentiment, which he cannot well express and will not
    reject.”

    “What he does best he soon ceases to do.”

    “A quibble is to Shakespeare what luminous vapours are to the
    traveller; he follows it at all adventures.”

    “He neglects the unities—those laws which have been instituted
    and established by the joint authority of poets and critics.”

Johnson proceeds to defend Shakespeare by an excellent demonstration
of the absurdity of the unities, and at the close of it owns himself
“almost frighted at his own temerity.” Then he follows Pope in finding
Shakespeare to be hampered by the age in which he lived. “The English
nation, in the time of Shakespeare, was yet struggling to emerge from
barbarity.” Having to appeal to immature intellects, he was compelled
to base his plays on novels and traditions well known to his audience,
“for his audience could not have followed him through the intricacies
of the drama had they not held the thread of the story in their
hands.” In reply to Voltaire, who expressed wonder that Shakespeare’s
extravagances should be endured by a nation which had seen the tragedy
of _Cato_, Johnson says that “Addison speaks the language of poets, and
Shakespeare of men.” He proceeds to deal with Shakespeare’s learning,
and Shakespeare emerges from the ordeal credited with rather less than
the average board-school boy of the present day. Johnson decides at
length that “if much of his praise is paid by perception and judgment,
much is likewise given by custom and veneration”; and, finally, he
sums up his merits in the following fine sentence:—

    “It therefore is the praise of Shakespeare, that his drama is
    the mirror of life; that he who has mazed his imagination, in
    following the phantoms which other writers raise up before him,
    may here be cured of his delirious ecstasies, by reading human
    sentiments in human language; by scenes from which a hermit may
    estimate the transactions of the world, and a confessor predict
    the progress of the passions.”[19:1]

It is difficult in the face of these pros and cons to determine
what Johnson’s attitude towards Shakespeare really was. Much of his
apparent hostility may, perhaps, be attributed to his instinctive
argumentativeness. It was his nature to object. If he were in a
loquacious mood, you had but to make a bald statement, and he was
upon you with an aggressively persuasive “Why, sir!” And here it may
be that he felt irresistibly impelled to combat the universal opinion
of Shakespeare’s greatness, and that he was hardly sincere in all he
wrote. However this may be, it is probable that he left on his readers
the impression that the balance of his inclination was against rather
than for Shakespeare. The very fact of the judicial attitude would
tend to produce such an impression. A judicial attitude towards
Shakespeare was not at that period so well understood as to be readily
distinguished from unfriendliness. And in estimating the critical
attitude of the age towards Shakespeare, it is necessary to bear in
mind that Dr. Johnson was a more important person when he lived than he
is now. Nothing is gained by speculating what he might have thought.
The fact remains that what he wrote carried weight.

Johnson’s opinion was not, however, sufficiently weighty to make his
preface, as he intended it to be, the last word in Shakespearean
criticism. Other editors followed him. Edward Capell brought much
serious and laborious scholarship to the task; and his judgments were
frequently sound, though his lack of perspicuity in delivering them
detracts somewhat from their value. His edition appeared in 1768. Five
years later, in 1773, George Steevens revised Johnson’s edition, and,
bringing to the enterprise an unrivalled knowledge of Elizabethan
history and literature, embodied many improvements, which he treated
with a humour that was frequently malicious and occasionally obscene.
To the second edition (1778) of this work was added much valuable
material relating to Shakespeare’s biography and the sources of his
plots, due to the researches of Edmund Malone, who published an
edition of his own in 1790. The well-known “First Variorum” edition
appeared in twenty-one volumes in 1803, prepared by Isaac Reed from a
1793 copy of Steevens’, containing many manuscript notes. The “Second
Variorum” appeared in 1813; and the “Third Variorum,” arranged by James
Boswell, the son of Johnson’s biographer, which appeared in 1821, marks
the close of what may be called the eighteenth century period of
commentators.

It will be seen, then, that Shakespeare was at this time kept
prominently before the eyes of the reading public. He was equally a
topic of interest with men of letters who confined themselves to no
special branch of literature. The attitude of the eighteenth century
essayists toward Shakespeare was essentially one of admiration and
respect for his genius. They found fault with his plays, it is true,
frequently enough, but almost always apologetically. He was not
infrequently held up as a model for modern dramatists to follow. The
_Connoisseur_, for example, printed a paper discussing the sources
of the _Merchant of Venice_; and while elaborating the fact that
the plot was borrowed, insisted on the genius displayed in the use
which Shakespeare made of it. The _Guardian_, again, enlarges on the
naturalness of Shakespeare’s characters—remarkable at a time when
poetry was, above all things, rhetorical and artificial.

Let us glance now at the poetical critics. It will be noticed that
many of the pieces printed in the body of this book appear under
names that are not very familiar, and that the eighteenth century is
responsible for the majority of them. In modern anthologies it is not
usual to include selections from the works of such poets; nor, indeed,
if literary excellence be the compiler’s object, is it expedient.
They are included here not because their effusions appear to me to
reach even a modest standard of merit, but because they were accepted
as good poets by their contemporaries and by the literary dictator,
Dr. Johnson. Johnson, it is true, disclaimed responsibility for the
choice of names represented in his edition of British poets, but the
repudiation cannot be considered of much importance. Johnson’s name
had probably more weight with publishers than that of any other man
of his time, and it is hardly likely that his advice in the matter of
inclusion or rejection, had he thought it worth while to give it, would
have been ignored. So one may feel certain that every name on his list
appeared with his approval. The laudatory criticisms embodied in the
biographies, which he asserted marked the extent of his commission,
prove as much. Take Blackmore, for example, whose _Creation_ was
included, on Johnson’s recommendation, in his edition of the poets.
“This poem,” he says, “if he had written nothing else, would have
transmitted him to posterity among the first favourites of the English
Muse.” Posterity, on the whole, has not given the Muse’s favourite much
of a welcome, and Blackmore is one of a number of such chosen ones. But
even Johnson might have known better. They had their reputations ready
made for them by patrons. It was the age of patrons and extravagant
compliment, and Shakespeare in the hands of these small poets took a
place similar to that of the gods and goddesses of Greece and Rome.
Poetical flatterers of great men permitted him to fill the position of
comparative in the scale of eulogy, the object of their praises being
the superlative. Just as the writers of light society compliments made
envious Venus second to Clorinda or Chloe or Celia, so Shakespeare
stood aside to find himself excelled by Addison or Pope or Dryden, or
even, on exceptional occasions, by some patron who scarcely did more
than pretend to throw off little trifles in verse. Witness the “Lines
to Mr. Addison,” by William Somervile:

    “In heaven he [Shakespeare] sings; on earth your muse supplies
     Th’ important loss, and heals our weeping eyes.”

Or take these lines by John Hughes, “To Mr. Addison on his Tragedy of
_Cato_”:

    “Great Shakespeare’s ghost, the solemn strain to hear
     (Methinks I see the laurel’d shade appear!),
     Will hover o’er the scene, and wondering view
     His favourite Brutus rival’d thus by you.”

If one could suppose this to have been written in an ironic vein, the
lines would be satisfactorily pointed; but it is impossible, for Hughes
continues:

    “Such Roman greatness in each action shines,
     Such Roman eloquence adorns your lines,
     That sure the Sibyl’s books this year foretold,
     And in some mystic leaf was found inroll’d,
     Rome, turn thy mournful eyes from Afric’s shore,
     Nor in her sands thy Cato’s tomb explore!
     When thrice six hundred times the circling sun
     His annual race shall through the zodiac run,
     An isle remote his monument shall rear,
     And every generous Briton pay a tear.”

Or take the following by William Pattison, “To Mr. John Saunders,
occasioned by a sight of some of his paintings at Cambridge.” It would
be difficult to imagine a more incongruous bracketing of names than
that in the sixth line. The italics are my own:

    “When Nature, from her unexhausted mine,
     Resolves to make some mighty science shine;
     Her embryo seeds inform the future birth,
     Improve the soul, and animate the earth;
     From thence, an Homer, or Apelles rise,
     _A Shakespeare, or a Saunders_, strike our eyes,
     And, lo! the promis’d wonder charms my view,
     The old Apelles rivall’d in the new!”

One might quote pages of such stuff—torrents of heroic couplets—whose
very form, apart from their sentiment, show that Shakespeare was deemed
rather out of date. But the mention of his name counts for something.
It means that all of these poets felt, as Dr. Johnson felt, that though
they were not quite in sympathy with the old Elizabethan playwright, he
was still some one to be reckoned with. Indeed, every now and then the
truth comes out that he was too much for them. William Whitehead, for
one, had a full appreciation of him.

    “O for a Shakespeare’s pencil, while I trace
     In nature’s breathing paint, the dreary waste
     Of Buxton” . . .

he sighs in _An Hymn to the Nymph of Bristol_; and, for all the bathos
of its expression, the admiration is genuine.

William Hamilton wrote _A Soliloquy in Imitation of Hamlet_, a
paraphrase of the famous speech, almost as bald as that from which
Shakespeare copied his. But the effort is doubtless more of a literary
exercise than an attempt at improvement of the original, for Hamilton
shows at various points in his works a fairly intimate knowledge and
real regard for Shakespeare’s genius.

Mallet read his Shakespeare intelligently, as witness his _Edwin and
Emma_, a love ballad, with its text taken from _Twelfth Night_. And
William Shenstone shows the right spirit in this very passable stanza
from _The Schoolmistress_, happily describing a village school:

    “Yet nurs’d with skill, what dazzling fruits appear!
       Ev’n now sagacious foresight points to show
     A little bench of heedless bishops here,
       And there a chancellor in embryo,
       Or bard sublime, if bard may e’er be so,
     As Milton, Shakespeare, names that ne’er shall die!
       Though now he crawl along the ground so low,
     Nor weeting how the muse shall soar on high,
     Wishes, poor starveling elf! his paper kite to fly.”

That is well meaning and temperate enough, but some of these writers
erred on the side of enthusiasm. The following passage from Robert
Lloyd’s _Shakespeare, an Epistle to Mr. Garrick_, may be quoted as an
example:

    “Oh, where’s the bard, who at one view
     Could look the whole creation through,
     Who travers’d all the human heart,
     Without recourse to Grecian art?
     He scorn’d the modes of imitation,
     Of altering, pilfering, and translation;
     Nor painted horror, grief, or rage,
     From models of a former age;
     The bright original he took,
     And tore the leaf from nature’s book.
     ’Tis Shakespeare, thus, who stands alone.”

It will be noted that this effusion approaches Shakespeare through
Garrick; and such is the case with many others that must remain
unquoted. The reason is that Garrick occupied, by public consent if
not by his own desire, the position of Shakespeare’s patron. He took,
for instance, a leading part in organising the Shakespeare jubilee
at Stratford-on-Avon. Among his enterprises on this occasion was the
issue of a volume of tributes to Shakespeare, containing several
poetical pieces by himself, distinguished rather for their enthusiasm
than for poetical inspiration. Dr. Johnson opened the book with some
light verses, addressed to The Fair in a vein of somewhat elephantine
playfulness; and Garrick collected into it a number of extracts from
various writers, in verse and prose, in praise of Shakespeare,
prefacing the whole with a high-flown effort of his own in heroic
couplets, and publishing it in handsome quarto.

In the garden of his house at Hampton, Garrick had a temple dedicated
to Shakespeare, and adorned with statuary, of which the chief piece, a
fine full-length figure by Roubiliac, is now in the entrance hall of
the British Museum. But to do him justice, his efforts, though they
carried the manner of the playhouse into private life, were conceived
in a spirit of genuine appreciation; and if many of his admirers
regarded him almost as the rescuer of Shakespeare from oblivion, he, at
any rate, was ready to acknowledge his indebtedness to the dramatist on
the presentation of whose characters his well-merited fame rested.

So much for the second period.[26:1] Its literature is like a troubled
sea of conflicting opinion, through which the ship of Shakespeare’s
genius sails, tossed and buffeted by winds fair and foul, from all
points of the compass, and emerges triumphant.


V

THE THIRD PERIOD

In the foregoing brief survey I have endeavoured to indicate in the
broadest manner possible the principal forces that affected the
opinions concerning Shakespeare held during the eighteenth century—the
chief boulders, so to say, round which the current of opinion swirled.
No such analysis seems necessary in dealing with the nineteenth
century. That is, comparatively speaking, smooth water. The poetic
reformation inaugurated by Wordsworth and Coleridge, who published
their _Lyrical Ballads_ in 1798, practically effaced the classic
traditions of the previous hundred years, and prepared a way for the
school of æsthetic criticism which set Shakespeare in the place which
he now holds.

Æsthetic criticism, of a kind, was not entirely unknown. So far
back, for instance, as 1736, an anonymous pamphlet appeared with the
title, _Some Remarks on the Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark_.
The author is an enthusiastic admirer of “the greatest tragic writer
that ever lived (except Sophocles and Euripides),” though most of the
beauties which he points out would be obvious to a reader of average
intelligence, and his expositions lack insight. Such efforts were, in
fact, nothing more than academic recreation, and but for their evidence
of a right tendency are hardly worthy of mention. In effect they were,
of course, immeasurably distant from the work of the æsthetic critics
of the early nineteenth century. Coleridge spoke truly when he thus
described his achievement:

    “However inferior in ability I may be to some who have followed
    me, I own I am proud that I was the first in time who publicly
    demonstrated to the full extent of the position, that the
    supposed irregularity and extravagances of Shakespeare were the
    mere dreams of a pedantry that arraigned the eagle because it
    had not the dimensions of the swan.”[28:1]

One has but to mention Hazlitt as Coleridge’s co-worker to feel that
Shakespeare’s position can never be seriously called in question.

In the mass of literature, much of it excellent, that has sprung from
this beginning, two works only—in English prose—are so pre-eminent as
to demand mention here, Mr. Swinburne’s _Study of Shakespeare_ (1880),
and Professor Dowden’s _Shakespeare, his Mind and Art_ (1874). Of
these, Mr. Swinburne’s book astounds one with a flow of eulogistic
rhetoric that can only be compared with the marvellous piece of
inspired enthusiasm on the same subject by Victor Hugo.

In nineteenth century verse Shakespeare’s name appears comparatively
seldom, excepting in poems written directly in his honour. This is a
logical result of the change from the poetic manner of the eighteenth
century, and the abandonment of the poetry of direct didacticism.
The characteristic poetry of the nineteenth century was as different
from that of the eighteenth century as the pictures of Turner were
from those of the English pre-Raphaelites. That is to say, the
typical poetry of the earlier age was marked by a clean symmetry, a
clearness of imagery, and a sharpness of detail paralleled in some
degree by the pictures of the pre-Raphaelites; whereas the poetry of
the nineteenth century leaned more to imaginative embroidery, and
what one may call, perhaps, the indefiniteness occasioned by artistic
introspection. It was, in fact, very much in the nature of a change
from a public oration to a private soliloquy. Even the mention, in
nineteenth century poetry, of a great man’s name to typify in a measure
the greatness of his country, is unusual. In Wordsworth’s sonnet, “It
is not to be thought of,” for example, the names of Shakespeare and
Milton come as something of a surprise from the poet who did most to
introduce the nineteenth century school of poetry. It is curious to
note that here the poet unconsciously imitates the manner of the verse
from which he deemed it his mission to effect a change; this sonnet
is, indeed, curiously typical of the period of poetic reformation in
which it was composed; for, though it belongs distinctly to the new
school, it possesses in the references to Shakespeare and Milton one
of the prominent characteristics of eighteenth century poetry. Thus,
though the poetry of the third period contains poems of the highest
order in direct praise of Shakespeare, as witness the sonnets of Mr.
Swinburne and Matthew Arnold, it is apparent that the anthologist
will find the greater part of his material in the works of prose
writers. At first glance one is bewildered by the mass of literature
which presents itself, but the scheme of this collection goes a small
way towards simplifying the choice. Pieces dealing with particular
merits of Shakespeare have generally been rejected, so that studies
of characters in the plays find no place. Similarly, studies, such,
for example, as De Quincey’s fine psychological analysis of the
knocking at the gate in _Macbeth_, have been excluded. Still, even
with these limitations, one feels that the task of selection is
beset with dangers. Every reader of Shakespearean literature has his
favourite passages, and though I have endeavoured to judge with a just
catholicity, I present the result of my labours in all meekness.


VI

SCHEME OF THE BOOK

The extracts have been arranged in three divisions. The first, which is
subdivided into three periods, corresponding with those described in
the foregoing notes, contains pieces in direct praise of Shakespeare.

The second part of the work contains brief passages in prose and verse
similar in character to those in the first part, but selected either
for their epigrammatic terseness or for their crystallisation of a fine
thought that is conveniently detachable from its context.

The third part is devoted to pieces which treat Shakespeare or his
works from a romantic standpoint. The devotion of only a small space to
this section was inevitable, and I regret the number of omissions. One
especially must be mentioned. Landor’s witty _Citation and Examination
of William Shakespeare_ on the charge of deer stealing, represents
exactly the kind of piece which I aimed at including. It is, however,
far too long to quote in full, and the interest is so deftly carried
throughout that I have found it quite impossible to select any portion
which could stand intelligibly by itself. I should have liked, also,
to include Browning’s poem, _At the Mermaid_, but here the question of
copyright intervened.

The dates immediately following the authors’ names show (sometimes
approximately) the earliest years with which the pieces quoted can be
definitely associated. Occasionally they mark the year in which the
piece was written, but in the majority of cases the year is that of
publication.

My best thanks are due to the following authors and publishers, who
have kindly given me permission to use copyright pieces:—Mr. A.
C. Swinburne, Mr. W. M. Rossetti, Mr. Gerald Massey, Mr. Theodore
Watts-Dunton, Mr. William Watson, Mr. Richard Watson Gilder, Mr. W.
S. Gilbert, Dr. Ludwig Mond (Mathilde Blind), Messrs. Macmillan & Co.
(Francis Turner Palgrave, Matthew Arnold, and John Henry Newman),
Messrs. Ellis & Elvey (Dante Gabriel Rossetti), Messrs. George Allen &
Son (John Ruskin), Messrs. Smith Elder & Co. (Robert Browning).

Finally, it is my pleasant duty to record my deep indebtedness to Mr.
Sidney Lee, at whose suggestion this book was undertaken.

                                                         C. E. H.


FOOTNOTES:

[5:1] I can myself add nothing but suggestions of possible borrowings
from Shakespearean diction. In the poem, _The Court Burlesqu’d_,
printed in Samuel Butler’s _Remains_, the lines—

    “This, by a rat behind the curtain
     Has been o’erheard, some say for certain,”

may be reminiscent of the scene in _Hamlet_ in which Polonius is
killed; and in Quarles’ _Argalus and Parthenia_, the expression “to
gild perfection,” which occurs in the 21st line of the first book,
seems to echo the passage in _King John_, “to gild refined gold, to
paint the lily,” etc.

[10:1] In 1756.

[19:1] Johnson several times expresses himself in a like spirit in his
_Rambler_:

“It may be doubtful whether from all his successors more maxims of
theoretical knowledge, or more rules of practical prudence, can be
collected than he alone has given to his country.”—_Works_, v. 131.

“He that has read Shakespeare with attention will, perhaps, find little
new in the crowded world.”—_Ib._ 434.

“Let him that is yet unacquainted with the powers of Shakespeare, and
who desires to feel the highest pleasure that the drama can give, read
every play, from the first scene to the last, with utter negligence of
all his commentators. When his fancy is on the wing, let it not stoop
at correction or explanation.”—_Ib._ 152.

[26:1] A word may be said here of the eighteenth century anthologists.
Collections of poems were numerous. That by Dodsley, with its
supplement prepared by Pearch, contains nothing by Shakespeare, nor
indeed does Nichols’ collection, which claimed to include no poem
that had been printed in the volumes issued by Dodsley or Pearch. A
collection by Thomas Tomkins, entitled _Poems on Various Subjects:
selected to enforce the Practice of Virtue, and with a View to comprise
in One Volume the Beauties of English Poetry_ (1787), goes no farther
back than Milton; and the well-known anthology, _Select Beauties of
Ancient English Poetry_, with remarks by Henry Headley, contains such
names as Drayton, Warner, Drummond, Raleigh, Surrey, Carew, Wyat,
and Browne, but Shakespeare finds no place. He does not, in fact,
enter regularly collections of this kind until the beginning of the
nineteenth century—the period of “Elegant Extracts.” But he is quoted
frequently enough in Edward Bysshe’s _Art of English Poetry_ (1724);
and John Bowle, in his _Miscellaneous Pieces of Ancient English Poetry_
(1765), selects from _King John_.

[28:1] _Literary Remains_ (1836), vol. ii. p. 63.




PART I

“THESE THREE HUNDRED YEARS”

    Any time these three hundred years.

                                         _Merry Wives_, I. i. 13.


    When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
      And broils root out the work of masonry,
    Nor Mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn
      The living record of your memory.
    ’Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
      Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room,
    Even in the eyes of all posterity
      That wear this world out to the ending doom.

                                                     _Sonnet LV._




THE FIRST PERIOD

SIXTEENTH AND SEVENTEENTH CENTURIES


FRANCIS MERES, 1596

(1565-1647)

As the soul of Euphorbus was thought to live in Pythagoras, so the
sweet witty soul of Ovid lives in mellifluous and honey-tongued
Shakespeare, witness his “Venus and Adonis,” his “Lucrece,” his sugared
sonnets among his private friends, etc.

As Plautus and Seneca are accounted the best for Comedy and Tragedy
among the Latins, so Shakespeare among the English is the most
excellent in both kinds for the stage; for Comedy, witness his
“Gentlemen of Verona,” his “Errors,” his “Love’s Labour’s Lost,”
his “Love’s Labour’s Wonne,” his “Midsummer Night’s Dream,” and his
“Merchant of Venice”; for Tragedy, his “Richard the 2,” “Richard the
3,” “Henry the 4,” “King John,” “Titus Andronicus,” and his “Romeo and
Juliet.”

As Epius Stolo said that the Muses would speak with Plautus’ tongue,
if they would speak Latin; so I say that the Muses would speak with
Shakespeare’s fine filed phrase, if they would speak English.

                 _Palladis Tamia. Wits Treasury, Being the Second
                     Part of Wits Commonwealth._ 1598.


RICHARD BARNFIELD, 1598

(1574-1627)

“_A Remembrance of some English Poets._”

    And Shakespeare thou, whose honey-flowing Vein
    (Pleasing the World), thy Praises doth obtain.
    Whose _Venus_, and whose _Lucrece_ (sweet, and chaste)
    Thy Name in Fame’s immortal Book have placed.
      Live ever you, at least in Fame live ever:
      Well may the Body die, but Fame dies never.

                   _Poems in Divers humors._ 1598. Sig. E2, back.


JOHN WEEVER, 1599

(1576-1632)

“_Ad Gulielmum Shakespeare._”

    Honey-tongued Shakespeare, when I saw thine issue,
      I swore Apollo got them and none other;
    Their rosy-tinted features clothed in tissue,
      Some heaven-born goddess said to be their mother:
    Rose-cheeked _Adonis_, with his amber tresses,
      Fair fire-hot _Venus_, charming him to love her,
    Chaste _Lucretia_, virgin-like her dresses,
      Proud lust-stung _Tarquin_, seeking still to prove her:
    Romeo, Richard; more whose names I know not,
      Their sugared tongues, and power attractive beauty
    Say they are saints, although that saints they show not,
      For thousands vow to them subjective duty:
    They burn in love, thy children, Shakespeare het them,     [heated
    Go, woo thy Muse, more Nymphish brood beget them.

              _Epigrammes in the oldest Cut, and newest Fashion._
                  John Weever. 1599. Epig. 22.

    Some bibliographers have assigned the first edition of Weever’s
    _Epigrammes_ to the year 1595, but no copy bearing that date is
    known.


JOHN DAVIES, 1610

(1565?-1618)

“_To our English Terence, Mr. Will. Shakespeare._”

    Some say, good Will, which I in sport do sing,
      Had’st thou not play’d some kingly parts in sport,
    Thou had’st been a companion for a king,
      And been a king among the meaner sort.
    Some others rail; but rail as they think fit,
    Thou hast no railing, but a reigning wit:
      And honesty thou sow’st which they do reap;
      So, to increase their stock which they do keep:

                  _The Scourge of Folly, consisting of Satyricall
                      Epigramms and others._ 1611.


THOMAS FREEMAN, 1614

(_fl._ 1614)

“_To Master W. Shakespeare._”

    Shakespeare, that nimble Mercury thy brain
      Lulls many hundred Argus-eyes asleep,
    So fit, for all thou fashionest thy rein,
      At th’ horse-foot fountain thou hast drank full deep,
    Vertues or vices theme to thee all one is:
      Who loves chaste life, there’s _Lucrece_ for a Teacher:
    Who but read lust there’s _Venus and Adonis_,
      True model of a most lascivious leacher.
    Besides in plays thy wit winds like Meander:
      Whence needy new-composers borrow more
    Than Terence doth from Plautus or Menander.
      But to praise thee aright I want thy store:
        Then let thine own works thine own worth upraise,
        And help t’ adorn thee with deserved Bays.

                    _Runne, and a Great Caste. The Second Bowle._
                        (_Being the second part of a Rubbe, and
                        a Great Cast_, 1614.) Epigram 92, Sig.
                        K2, back.


WILLIAM BASSE, 1622

(_d._ 1653?)

“_On Mr. William Shakespeare._”

    Renowned Spenser lie a thought more nigh
    To learned Beaumont, and rare Beaumont lie
    A little nearer Chaucer, to make room
    For Shakespeare in your threefold, fourfold tomb.
    To lodge all four in one bed make a shift
    Until Doom’s day, for hardly will (a) fift
    Betwixt this day and that by fate be slain,
    For whom the curtains shall be drawn again.
    For if precedency in death do bar
    A fourth place in your sacred sepulchre,
    In this uncarved marble of thy own,
    Sleep, brave Tragedian, Shakespeare, sleep alone;
    Thy unmolested rest, unshared cave,
    Possess as lord, not tenant, to the grave,
      That unto others it may counted be
      Honour hereafter to be layed by thee.

                  _Fennell’s Shakespere Repository_, 1853, p. 10.
                      Printed from a MS. _temp._ Charles I.


ANONYMOUS, 1623

    _Judicio Pylium, genio Socratem, arte Maronem, Terra tegit,
        populus maeret, Olympus habet._

    Stay, passenger, who goest thou by so fast?
    Read, if thou canst, whom envious death hath placed
    Within this monument; Shakespeare with whom
    Quick nature died; whose name doth deck this tomb
    Far more than cost; sith all that he hath writ
    Leaves living art but page to serve his wit.

             Inscription on the Monument erected to Shakespeare’s
                 Memory in the Parish Church at Stratford-on-Avon.
                 1623.


BEN JONSON, 1623

(1573-1637)

    “_To the memory of my beloved, the Author, Mr. William
        Shakespeare: and what he hath left us._”

    To draw no envy, Shakespeare, on thy name,
    Am I thus ample to thy book, and fame:
    While I confess thy writings to be such,
    As neither Man, nor Muse, can praise too much.
    ’Tis true, and all men’s suffrage. But these ways
    Were not the paths I meant unto thy praise:
    For seeliest Ignorance on these may light,
    Which, when it sounds at best, but echoes right;
    Or blind Affection, which doth ne’er advance
    The truth, but gropes, and urgeth all by chance;
    Or crafty Malice, might pretend this praise,
    And think to ruin, where it seem’d to raise . . .
    But thou art proof against them, and in deed
    Above th’ ill fortune of them, or the need.
    I, therefore, will begin. Soul of the age!
    The applause! delight! the wonder of our stage!
    My Shakespeare, rise; I will not lodge thee by
    Chaucer, or Spenser, or bid Beaumont lie
    A little further to make thee a room:
    Thou art a monument, without a tomb,
    And art alive still, while thy book doth live,
    And we have wits to read, and praise to give.
    That I not mix thee so, my brain excuses;
    I mean with great, but disproportion’d Muses:
    For, if I thought my judgment were of years,
    I should commit thee surely with thy peers,
    And tell how for thou didst our Lyly out-shine,
    Or sporting Kid, or Marlowe’s mighty line.
    And though thou hadst small Latin, and less Greek,
    From thence to honour thee, I would not seek
    For names; but call forth thundering Æschilus,
    Euripides, and Sophocles to us,
    Paccuvius, Accius, him of Cordova dead,
    To life again, to hear thy buskin tread,
    And shake a stage: or, when thy socks were on,
    Leave thee alone, for the comparison
    Of all that insolent Greece or haughty Rome
    Sent forth, or since did from their ashes come.
    Triumph, my Britain, thou hast one to show,
    To whom all scenes of Europe homage owe.
    He was not of an age, but for all time!
    And all the Muses still were in their prime,
    When like Apollo he came forth to warm
    Our ears, or like a Mercury to charm!
    Nature herself was proud of his designs,
    And joy’d to wear the dressing of his lines!
    Which were so richly spun, and woven so fit,
    As, since, she will vouchsafe no other wit.
    The merry Greek, tart Aristophanes,
    Neat Terence, witty Plautus, now not please;
    But antiquated and deserted lie
    As they were not of Nature’s family.
    Yet must I not give Nature all: thy Art,
    My gentle Shakespeare, must enjoy a part.
    For though the Poet’s matter, Nature be,
    His Art doth give the fashion. And, that he,
    Who casts to write a living line, must sweat
    (Such as thine are), and strike the second heat
    Upon the Muse’s anvil: turn the same
    (And himself in it) that he thinks to frame;
    Or for the laurel, he may gain a scorn,
    For a good Poet’s made, as well as born.
    And such wert thou. Look how the father’s face
    Lives in his issue, even so, the race
    Of Shakespeare’s mind and manners brightly shines
    In his well turned and true-filed lines:
    In each of which he seems to shake a lance,
    As brandish’d at the eyes of Ignorance.
    Sweet Swan of Avon! what a sight it were
    To see thee in our waters yet appear,
    And make those flights upon the banks of Thames,
    That so did take Eliza, and our James!
    But stay, I see thee in the hemisphere
    Advanced, and made a constellation there!
    Shine forth, thou Star of Poets, and with rage,
    Or influence, chide, or cheer the drooping Stage;
    Which, since thy flight from hence, hath mourn’d like night,
    And despairs day, but for thy volume’s light.

             Prefixed to the First Folio Edition of Shakespeare’s
                 _Works_.


          . . . “I will not lodge thee by
    Chaucer, or Spenser, or bid Beaumont lie
    A little further to make thee a room.”

                                        See William Basse, p. 40.


HUGH HOLLAND, 1623

(_d._ 1633)

    “_Upon the Lines and Life of the famous Scenick Poet, Master
        William Shakespeare._”

    Those hands, which you so clapt, go now, and wring
        You Britain’s brave; for done are Shakespeare’s days:
        His days are done, that made the dainty Plays,
    Which make the Globe of heav’n and earth to ring.
    Dried is that vein, dried is the Thespian Spring,
        Turn’d all to tears, and Phœbus clouds his rays:
        That corpse, that coffin now bestick those bayes,
    Which crown’d him Poet first, then Poet’s King.
    If Tragedies might any Prologue have,
        All those he made, would scarce make one to this:
    Where Fame, now that he gone is to the grave
        (Death’s public tiring-house), the Nuncius is.
    For though his line of life went soon about,
    The life yet of his lines shall never out.

             Prefixed to the First Folio Edition of Shakespeare’s
                 _Works_.


JOHN HEMINGE, 1623

(_d._ 1630)

HENRIE CONDELL

(_d._ 1627)

“_To the great Variety of Readers._”

His mind and hand went together: and what he thought he uttered with
that easiness, that we have scarce received from him a blot in his
papers. But it is not our province, who only gather his works, and give
them you, to praise him. It is yours that read him. And there we hope,
to your divers capacities, you will find enough, both to draw, and
hold you: for his wit can no more lie hid, than it could be lost. Read
him, therefore; and again, and again: and if then you do not like him,
surely you are in some manifest danger, not to understand him. And so
we leave you to other of his friends, whom, if you need, can be your
guides: if you need them not, you can lead yourselves, and others. And
such readers we wish him.

                   Address prefixed to the First Folio Edition of
                       Shakespeare’s _Works_. 1623.


LEONARD DIGGES, 1623

(1588-1635)

“_To the Memorie of the deceased Author, Maister W. Shakespeare._”

    Shakespeare, at length thy pious fellows give
    The world thy Works: thy Works, by which, out-live
    Thy Tomb, thy name must: when that stone is rent,
    And Time dissolves thy Stratford Monument,
    Here we alive shall view thee still. This Book,
    When brass and marble fade, shall make thee look
    Fresh to all ages: when posterity
    Shall loath what’s new, thinke all is prodigy
    That is not Shakespeare’s; ev’ry line, each verse,
    Here shall revive, redeem thee from thy hearse.
    Nor fire, nor cankering age, as Naso said,
    Of his, thy wit-fraught Book, shall once invade.
    Nor shall I e’er believe, or think thee dead
    (Though missed), until our bankrout Stage be sped
    (Impossible) with some new strain t’ out-do
    Passions of Juliet, and her Romeo;
    Or till I hear a scene more nobly take,
    Then when thy half-sword parlying Romans spake,
    Till these, till any of thy Volumes rest
    Shall with more fire, more feeling be expressed,
    Be sure, our Shakespeare, thou canst never die,
    But crown’d with laurel, live eternally.

                           Prefixed to the First Folio Edition of
                               Shakespeare’s _Works_. 1623.


MICHAEL DRAYTON, 1627

(1563-1631)

    “_To my most dearly-loved friend Henery Reynolds, Esquire, of
        Poets and Poesie._”

    Shakespeare, thou hadst as smooth a comic vein,
    Fitting the sock, and in thy natural brain,
    As strong conception, and as clear a rage
    As any one that trafick’d with the stage.

               Elegies at the end of _The Battaile of Agincourt_.
                   1627, p. 206.


JOHN MILTON, 1630

(1608-1674)

“_An Epitaph on the Admirable Dramatic Poet, W. Shakespeare._”

    What needs my Shakespeare for his honour’d bones,
    The labour of an age in pilèd stones?
    Or that his hallow’d relics should be hid
    Under a star-ypointing pyramid?
    Dear son of Memory, great heir of Fame,
    What need’st thou such weak witness of thy name?
    Thou, in our wonder and astonishment,
    Hast built thyself a life-long monument.
    For whilst, to the shame of slow-endeavouring art,
    Thy easy numbers flow; and that each heart
    Hath, from the leaves of thy unvalued book,
    Those Delphic lines with deep impression took;
    Then thou, our fancy of itself bereaving,
    Dost make us marble with too much conceiving;
    And, so sepulchr’d, in such pomp dost lie,
    That kings, for such a tomb should wish to die.

                Prefixed to Second Folio Edition of Shakespeare’s
                    _Works_. 1632.


I. M. S., 1632

“_On worthy Master Shakespeare and his Poems._”

    A mind reflecting ages past, whose clear
    And equal surface can make things appear
    Distant a thousand years, and represent
    Them in their lively colours’ just extent.
    To outrun hasty time, retrieve the fates,
    Roll back the heavens, blow ope the iron gates
    Of death and Lethe, where (confused) lie
    Great heaps of ruinous mortality.
    In that deep dusky dungeon to discern
    A royal ghost from churls: by art to learn
    The physiognomy of shades, and give
    Them sudden birth, wond’ring how oft they live.
    What story coldly tells, what poets feign
    At second hand, and picture without brain
    Senseless and soulless shows. To give a stage
    (Ample and true with life) voice, action, age,
    As Plato’s year and new scene of the world
    Them unto us, or us to them had hurl’d.
    To raise our ancient sovereigns from their herse,
    Make kings his subjects, by exchanging verse
    Enlive their pale trunks, that the present age
    Joys in their joy, and trembles at their rage:
    Yet so to temper passion, that our ears
    Take pleasure in their pain; and eyes in tears
    Both weep and smile; fearful at plots so sad,
    Then, laughing at our fear; abus’d, and glad
    To be abus’d, affected with that truth
    Which we perceive is false; pleas’d in that ruth
    At which we start; and by elaborate play
    Tortur’d and tickled; by a crablike way
    Time past made pastime, and in ugly sort
    Disgorging up his ravaine for our sport—
    —While the Plebeian Imp, from lofty throne,
    Creates and rules a world, and works upon
    Mankind by secret engines; now to move
    A chilling pity, then a rigorous love:
    To strike up and stroke down, both joy and ire;
    To steer th’ affections; and by heavenly fire
    Mould us anew. Stol’n from ourselves—
      This, and much more which cannot be express’d,
    But by himself, his tongue and his own breast,
    Was Shakespeare’s freehold, which his cunning brain
    Improv’d by favour of the ninefold train.
    The buskin’d Muse, the Comic Queen, the grand
    And louder tone of Clio; nimble hand,
    And nimbler foot of the melodious pair,
    The silver voiced Lady; the most fair
    Calliope, whose speaking silence daunts,
    And she whose praise the heavenly body chants.
      These jointly woo’d him, envying one another
    (Obey’d by all as spouse, but lov’d as brother),
    And wrought a curious robe of sable grave,
    Fresh green, and pleasant yellow, red most brave,
    And constant blue, rich purple, guiltless white,
    The lowly russet, and the scarlet bright;
    Branch’d and embroider’d like the painted Spring,
    Each leaf match’d with a flower, and each string
    Of golden wire, each line of silk; there run
    Italian works whose thread the Sisters spun;
    And there did sing, or seem to sing, the choice
    Birds of a foreign note and various voice.
    Here hangs a mossy rock; there plays a fair
    But chiding fountain purled; not the air,
    Nor clouds nor thunder, but were living drawn,
    Not out of common tiffany or lawn,
    But fine materials, which the Muses know,
    And only know the countries where they grow.
    Now, when they could no longer him enjoy
    In mortal garments pent, death may destroy,
    They say, his body, but his verse shall live;
    And more than nature takes, our hands shall give.
    In a less volume, but more strongly bound,
    Shakespeare shall breath and speak, with laurel crown’d
    Which never fades. Fed with Ambrosian meat,
    In a well-lined vesture rich and neat.
      So with this robe they clothe him, bid him wear it;
      For time shall never stain, nor envy tear it.

                 The friendly admirer of his Endowments, I. M. S.
                 Prefixed to the Second Folio Edition of
                     Shakespeare’s _Works_. 1632.

    Conjectures as to the authorship of this poem have been
    numerous. Coleridge in his _Lectures on Shakespeare_ says:
    “This poem is subscribed I. M. S., meaning, as some have
    explained, the initials “John Milton, Student”: the internal
    evidence seems to us decisive; for there was, I think, no
    other man, of that particular day, capable of writing anything
    so characteristic of Shakespeare, so justly thought, and so
    happily expressed.”


JOHN HALES, BEFORE 1633

(1584-1656)

In a conversation between Sir John Suckling, Sir William D’Avenant,
Endymion Porter, Mr. Hales of Eton, and Ben Jonson, Sir John Suckling,
who was a professed admirer of Shakespeare, had undertaken his defence
against Ben Jonson with some warmth. Mr. Hales, who had sat still for
some time, hearing Ben frequently reproaching him with the want of
learning, and ignorance of the ancients, told him at last, “That if
Mr. Shakespeare had not read the ancients, he had likewise not stolen
anything from ’em [a fault the other made no conscience of]; and that
if he would produce any one topic finely treated by any of them, he
would undertake to show something upon the same subject at least as
well written by Shakespeare.”

             Some Account of the Life of Mr. William Shakespeare,
                 prefixed to the edition of his _Works_ by
                 Nicholas Rowe, 1709, vol. i. p. xiv.


SIR WILLIAM D’AVENANT, 1637

(1606-1668)

“_Ode. In Remembrance of Master William Shakespeare._”


1

    Beware (delighted Poets!) when you sing
    To welcome Nature in the early Spring;
            Your num’rous feet not tread
    The Banks of Avon; for each flower
    (As it ne’er knew a sun or shower)
            Hangs there the pensive head.


2

    Each tree whose thick and spreading growth hath made
    Rather a night beneath the boughs, than shade
            (Unwilling now to grow),
    Looks like the plume a captive wears
    Whose rifled falls are steept i’ th’ tears
            Which from his last rage flow.


3

    The piteous river wept itself away
    Long since (alas!) to such a swift decay;
            That reach the map; and look
    If you a river there can spy;
    And for a river your mock’d eye
            Will find a shallow brook.

                     _Madagascar, with other Poems._ 1638, p. 37.
                         Printed 1637.


ANONYMOUS, ABOUT 1637

“_An Elegie on the Death of that famous Writer and Actor, Mr. William
Shakspeare._”

    I dare not do thy memory that wrong,
    Unto our larger griefs to give a tongue;
    I’ll only sigh in earnest, and let fall
    My solemn tears at thy great funeral;
    For every eye that rains a show’r for thee,
    Laments thy loss in a sad elegy.
    Nor is it fit each humble Muse should have
    Thy worth his subject, now th’ art laid in grave;
    No, it’s a flight beyond the pitch of those,
    Whose worthless pamphlets are not sense in prose.
    Let learned Jonson sing a Dirge for thee,
    And fill our Orb with mournful harmony:
    But we need no remembrancer; thy fame
    Shall still accompany thy honoured name
    To all posterity; and make us be
    Sensible of what we lost in losing thee:
    Being the age’s wonder, whose smooth rhymes
    Did more reform than lash the looser times.
    Nature herself did her own self admire,
    As oft as thou wert pleased to attire
    Her in her native lustre, and confess
    Thy dressing was her chiefest comliness.
    How can we then forget thee, when the age
    Her chiefest tutor, and the widowed stage
    Her only favourite in thee hath lost,
    And Nature’s self what she did brag of most?
    Sleep then, rich soul of numbers, whilst poor we
    Enjoy the profits of thy legacy;
    And thinke it happiness enough we have
    So much of thee redeemèd from the grave,
    As may suffice to enlighten future times
    With the bright lustre of thy matchless rhymes.

                 Appended to Shakespeare’s _Poems_. 1640. Sig. L.


THOMAS BANCROFT, 1639

(_fl._ 1633-1658)

“_To Shakespeare._”

    Thy Muse’s sugared dainties seem to us
    Like the fam’d apples of old Tantalus:
    For we, admiring, see and hear thy strains;
    But none I see or hear, those sweets attains.


“_To the same._”

    Thou hast so us’d thy pen (or shook thy spear),
    That Poets startle, nor thy wit come near.

                  _Two Bookes of Epigrammes, and Epitaphs._ 1639.
                      Nos. 118 and 119.


GEORGE DANIEL, 1647

(1616-1657)

    The sweetest Swan of Avon, to ye fair
      And cruel Delia, passionately sings;
    Other men’s weaknesses and follies are
      Honour and wit to him; each accent brings
    A sprig to crown him Poet; and contrive
    A monument, in his own work, to live.

           _Poems. Vindication of Poesie._ Add. MS. 19255, p. 17.
               (British Museum.) Privately printed by Dr.
               Grosart. 1878, 4 vols. Vol. i. pp. 28, 29.


SAMUEL SHEPPARD, 1651

(_fl. c._ 1606-1652)

“_In Memory of our Famous Shakespeare._”


1

    Sacred spirit, whiles thy Lyre
      Echoed o’er the Arcadian Plains,
    Even Apollo did admire,
      Orpheus wondered at thy strains.


2

    Plautus sigh’d, Sophocles wept
      Tears of anger, for to hear,
    After they so long had slept,
      So bright a genius should appear.


3

    Who wrote his Lines with a sun-beam,
      More durable than Time or Fate;
    Others boldly do blaspheme,
      Like those that seem to preach, but prate.


4

    Thou wert truly priest elect,
      Chosen darling to the Nine;
    Such a trophy to erect
      By thy wit and skill divine.


5

    That were all their other glories
      (Thine excepted) torn away,
    By thy admirable stories,
      Their garments ever shall be gay.


6

    Where thy honoured bones do lie
      (As Statius once to Maro’s urn),
    Thither every year will I
      Slowly tread, and sadly mourn.

            _Epigrams Theological, Philosophical, and Romantick._
                Six Books, etc., with other Select Poems. 1651.
                Book vi. Epig. 17, pp. 150, 152, 154.


THOMAS FULLER, _c._ 1661

(1608-1661)

He was an eminent instance of the truth of that rule, _Poeta non fit
sed nascitur_; one is not _made_, but _born_ a poet. Indeed, his
learning was very little, so that, as Cornish diamonds are not polished
by any lapidary, but are pointed and smoothed even as they are taken
out of the earth, so nature itself was all the _art_ which was used
upon him.

Many were the wit-combats betwixt him and Ben Jonson; which two I
behold like a Spanish great galleon and an English man of war: Master
Jonson (like the former) was built far higher in learning; solid, but
slow in his performances. Shakespeare, with the English man of war,
lesser in bulk, but lighter in sailing, could turn with all tides, tack
about, and take advantage of all winds, by the quickness of his wit and
invention.

                         _The History of the Worthies of England:
                             Warwickshire._ 1662, p. 126.


SAMUEL PEPYS, 1662-1667

(1633-1703)

1661-1662. March 1st. My wife and I by coach, first to see my little
picture that is a-drawing, and thence to the Opera, and there saw
“Romeo and Juliet,” the first time it was ever acted, but it is a play
of itself the worst that ever I heard, and the worst acts that ever I
saw these people do, and I am resolved to go no more to see the first
time of acting, for they were all of them out more or less.

1662. September 29th. To the King’s Theatre, where we saw “Midsummer
Night’s Dream,” which I had never seen before, nor ever shall again,
for it is the most insipid, ridiculous play that ever I saw in my life.

1666. December 28th. To the Duke’s House, and there saw “Macbeth” most
excellently acted, and a most excellent play for variety. I had sent my
wife to meet me there, who did come: so I did go to White Hall, and got
my Lord Bellassis to get me into the playhouse; and there, after all
staying above an hour for the players, the King and all waiting, which
was absurd, saw “Henry the Fifth” well done by the Duke’s people, and
in most excellent habit, all new vests, being put on but this night.
But I sat so high and far off, that I missed most of the words, and sat
with a wind coming into my back and neck, which did much trouble me.
The play continued till twelve at night; and then up, and a most horrid
cold night it was, and frosty, and moonshine.

1666-67. January 7th. To the Duke’s House, and saw “Macbeth,” which,
though I saw it lately, yet appears a most excellent play in all
respects, but especially in divertisement, though it be a deep tragedy;
which is a strange perfection in a tragedy, it being most proper here,
and suitable.

1667. October 16th. To the Duke of York’s House; and I was vexed to
see Young, who is but a bad actor at best, act Macbeth, in the room
of Betterton, who, poor man! is sick: but, Lord! what a prejudice it
wrought in me against the whole play, and everybody else agreed in
disliking this fellow. Thence home, and there find my wife gone home;
because of this fellow’s acting of the part, she went out of the house
again.

                _Diary and Correspondence of Samuel Pepys, with a
                    Life and Notes_, by Richard, Lord Braybrooke.
                    1888.


MARGARET CAVENDISH, DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE, 1664

(1624?-1674)

I wonder how that person you mention in your letter could either have
the conscience, or confidence to dispraise Shakespeare’s plays, as
to say they were made up only with clowns, fools, watchmen, and the
like; but to answer that person, though Shakespeare’s wit will answer
for himself, I say, that it seems by his judging, or censuring, he
understands not plays, or wit; for to express properly, rightly,
usually, and naturally, a clown’s, or fool’s humour, expressions,
phrases, garbs, manners, actions, words, and course of life, is as
witty, wise, judicious, ingenious, and observing, as to write and
express the expressions, phrases, garbs, manners, actions, words, and
course of life, of kings and princes; and to express naturally, to
the life, a mean country wench, as a great lady; a courtesan, as a
chaste woman; a mad man, as a man in his right reason and senses; a
drunkard, as a sober man; a knave, as an honest man; and so a clown,
as a well-bred man; and a fool, as a wise man; nay, it expresses
and declares a greater wit, to express, and deliver to posterity,
the extravagances of madness, the subtlety of knaves, the ignorance
of clowns, and the simplicity of naturals, or the craft of feigned
fools, than to express regularities, plain honesty, courtly garbs,
or sensible discourses, for ’tis harder to express nonsense than
sense, and ordinary conversations, than that which is unusual; and
’tis harder, and requires more wit to express a jester, than a grave
statesman; yet Shakespeare did not want wit to express to the life all
sorts of persons, of what quality, profession, degree, breeding, or
birth soever; nor did he want wit to express the divers and different
humours, or natures or several passions in mankind; and so well he hath
expressed in his plays all sorts of persons, as one would think he had
been transformed into every one of those persons he hath described....
Who could not swear he had been a noble lover, that could woo so
well? and there is not any person he had described in his book, but
his readers might think they were well acquainted with them; indeed,
Shakespeare had a clear judgment, a quick wit, a spreading fancy, a
subtle observation, a deep apprehension, and a most eloquent elocution;
truly he was a natural orator, as well as a natural poet, and he was
not an orator to speak well only on some subjects, as lawyers, who can
make eloquent orations at the bar, and plead subtly and wittily in
law-cases, or divines, that can preach eloquent sermons, or dispute
subtly and wittily in theology, but take them from that, and put them
to other subjects, and they will be to seek; but Shakespeare’s wit and
eloquence was general, for and upon all subjects, he rather wanted
subjects for his wit and eloquence to work on, for which he was forced
to take some of his plots out of history, where he only took the bare
designs, the wit and language being all his own.

           _CCXI Sociable Letters written by the Lady Marchioness
               of Newcastle._ 1664. Letter CXXIII.


JOHN DRYDEN, 1667

(1631-1700)

    As when a tree’s cut down, the secret root
    Lives under ground, and thence new branches shoot;
    So, from old Shakespeare’s honour’d dust, this day
    Springs up and buds a new reviving play.
    Shakespeare who, taught by none, did first impart
    To Fletcher wit, to labouring Jonson art.
    He, monarch-like, gave those his subjects law,
    And is that Nature which they paint and draw.
    Fletcher reach’d that which on his heights did grow,
    Whilst Jonson crept and gather’d all below.
    This did his love, and this his mirth digest:
    One imitates him most, the other best.
    If they have since out-writ all other men,
    ’Tis with the drops which fell from Shakespeare’s pen.
    The storm which vanish’d on the neighb’ring shore,
    Was taught by Shakespeare’s _Tempest_ first to roar.
    That innocence and beauty which did smile
    In Fletcher, grew on this Enchanted Isle.
    But Shakespeare’s magick could not copy’d be,
    Within that circle none durst walk but he.
    I must confess ’twas bold, nor would you now
    That liberty to vulgar wits allow,
    Which works by magick supernatural things:
    But Shakespeare’s pow’r is sacred as a king’s.
    Those legends from old priesthood were receiv’d,
    And he then writ, as people then believed.

                _Prologue to the Tempest or the Enchanted Island,
                    by Sir William D’Avenant and John Dryden._
                    1676.

    See also Dryden’s _Prologue to Troilus and Cressida_, spoken by
    Mr. Betterton representing the Ghost of Shakespeare.


1668

To begin, then, with Shakespeare; he was the man who of all modern, and
perhaps ancient poets, had the largest and most comprehensive soul. All
the images of nature were still present to him, and he drew them not
laboriously, but luckily: when he describes any thing, you more than
see it, you feel it too. Those who accuse him to have wanted learning,
give him the greater commendation: he was naturally learned; he needed
not the spectacles of books to read Nature; he looked inwards, and
found her there. I cannot say he is everywhere alike; were he so, I
should do him injury to compare him with the greatest of mankind. He is
many times flat, insipid; his comic wit degenerating into clenches, his
serious swelling into bombast. But he is always great, when some great
occasion is presented to him; no man can say he ever had a fit subject
for his wit, and did not then raise himself as high above the rest of
poets,

    _Quantum lenta solent inter viberna cupressi._

                     _Of Dramatic Poesie, an Essay_, 1668, p. 47.

    The following is from Dryden’s _Defence of the Epilogue_:—Let
    any man who understands English read diligently the works of
    Shakespeare and Fletcher, and I dare undertake that he will
    find in every page either some solecism of speech, or some
    notorious flaw in sense; and yet these men are reverenced, when
    we are not forgiven. That their wit is great, and many times
    their expressions noble, envy itself cannot deny.

          ——_Neque ego illis detrahere ausim
        Hærentem capiti multa cum laude coronam._

    But the times were ignorant in which they lived. Poetry was
    then, if not in its infancy among us, at least not arrived to
    its vigour and maturity. Witness the lameness of their plots;
    many of which, especially those which they writ first (for even
    that age refined itself in some measure), were made up of some
    ridiculous incoherent story, which in one play many times took
    up the business of an age. I suppose I need not name “Pericles,
    Prince of Tyre,” nor the historical plays of Shakespeare;
    besides many of the rest, as the “Winter’s Tale,” “Love’s
    Labour’s Lost,” “Measure for Measure,” which were either
    grounded on impossibilities, or at least so meanly written that
    the comedy neither caused your mirth, nor the serious part your
    concernment.


ANONYMOUS, 1672

    In country beauties, as we often see
    Something that takes in their simplicity;
    Yet while they charm, they know not they are fair,
    And take without their spreading of the snare;
    Such artless beauty lies in Shakespeare’s wit,
    ’Twas well in spite of him what ere he writ.
    His excellencies came and were not sought,
    His words like casual atoms made a thought:
    Drew up themselves in rank and file, and writ,
    He wond’ring how the Devil it were such wit.
    Thus like the drunken tinker, in his play,
    He grew a prince, and never knew which way.
    He did not know what trope or figure meant,
    But to persuade is to be eloquent;
    So in this Cæsar which this day you see,
    Tully ne’er spoke as he makes Anthony.
    Those then that tax his learning are to blame,
    He knew the thing, but did not know the name:
    Great Jonson did that ignorance adore,
    And though he envied much, admir’d him more.
    The faultless Jonson equally writ well:
    Shakespeare made faults; but then did more excell.
    One close at guard like some old fencer lay,
    T’other more open, but he show’d more play.
    In imitation Jonson’s wit was shown,
    Heaven made his men but Shakespeare made his own.
    Wise Jonson’s talent in observing lay,
    But other’s follies still made up his play.
    He drew the like in each elaborate line,
    But Shakespeare, like a master, did design.
    Jonson with skill dissected human kind,
    And show’d their faults that they their faults might find.
    But then, as all anatomists must do,
    He to the meanest of mankind did go,
    And took from gibbets such as he would show.
    Both are so great that he must boldly dare,
    Who both of ’em does judge and both compare.
    If amongst poets, one more bold there be,
    The man that dare attempt in either way, is he.

              _Covent Garden Drollery, or a Collection of all the
                  Choice Songs, Poems, Prologues, and Epilogues
                  (Sung and Spoken at Courts and Theaters),
                  never in Print before._ Written by the
                  refined’st Witts of the Age, and collected by
                  A. B. [? Alex. Brome]. 1672.


EDWARD PHILLIPS, 1675

(1630-1696?)

William Shakespeare, the glory of the English Stage; whose nativity
at Stratford-upon-Avon is the highest honour that town can boast of:
from an actor of tragedies and comedies, he became a maker; and such
a maker, that though some others may perhaps pretend to a more exact
decorum and economy, especially in tragedy, never any expressed a more
lofty and tragic height, never any represented nature more purely
to the life; and where the polishments of art are most wanting, as
probably his learning was not extraordinary, he pleaseth with a certain
wild and native elegance; and in all his writings hath an unvulgar
style, as well in his _Venus and Adonis_, his _Rape of Lucrece_, and
other various poems, as in his dramatics.

                  _Theatrum Poetarum._ 1675. Preface. _The Modern
                      Poets_, p. 194.


THOMAS OTWAY, 1680

(1652-1685)

    In ages past (when will those times renew?),
    When empires flourish’d, so did poets too.
    When great Augustus the world’s empire held,
    Horace and Ovid’s happy verse excell’d.
    Ovid’s soft genius, and his tender arts
    Of moving Nature, melted hardest hearts.
    It did th’ imperial beauty, Julia, move
    To listen to the language of his love.
    Her father honour’d him: and on her breast
    With ravish’d sense in her embraces prest,
    He lay transported, fancy-full and blest.
    Horace’s lofty genius boldlier rear’d
    His manly head, and through all Nature steer’d;
    Her richest pleasures in his verse refin’d,
    And wrought ’em to the relish of the mind.
    He lash’d with a true poet’s fearless rage,
    The villanies and follies of the age;
    Therefore Mecænas, that great fav’rite rais’d
    Him high, and by him was he highly prais’d.
    Our Shakespeare wrote, too, in an age as blest,
    The happiest poet of his time, and best;
    A gracious Prince’s favour cheer’d his muse,
    A constant favour he ne’er fear’d to lose.
    Therefore he wrote with fancy unconfin’d,
    And thoughts that were immortal as his mind;
    And from the crop of his luxuriant pen
    E’er since succeeding poets humbly glean.

               _Prologue to the History and Fall of Caius Marius.
                   A Tragedy._ 1712.


“A PERSON OF HONOUR,” 1681

I can’t, without infinite ingratitude to the memory of those excellent
persons, omit the first famous masters in’t, of our nation, venerable
Shakespeare and the great Ben Jonson. I have had a particular kindness
always for most of Shakespeare’s tragedies, and for many of his
comedies, and I can’t but say that I can never enough admire his style
(considering the time he writ in, and the great alteration that has
been in the refining of our language since), for he has expressed
himself so very well in’t that ’tis generally approved of still; and
for maintaining of the characters of the persons design’d, I think none
ever exceeded him.

           “_An Essay on Dramatic Poetry_” appended to _Amaryllis
               to Tityrus, Being the First Heroick Harangue of
               the excellent pen of Monsieur Scudery. A Witty and
               Pleasant Novel._ Englished by a Person of Honour,
               1681, pp. 66-67.


SIR CHARLES SEDLEY, 1693

(1639?-1701)

    But against old as well as new to rage,
    Is the peculiar frenzy of this age.
    Shakespeare must down, and you must praise no more
    Soft Desdemona, nor the jealous Moor:
    Shakespeare whose fruitful genius, happy wit
    Was fram’d and finish’d at a lucky hit;
    The pride of Nature, and the shame of schools,
    Born to create, and not to learn from rules;
    Must please no more, his bastards now deride,
    Their father’s nakedness they ought to hide,
    But when on spurs their Pegasus they force,
    Their jaded Muse is distanc’d in the course.

                _The Wary Widdow, or Sir Noisy Parrat. A Comedy._
                    By Henry Higden. Prologue by Sir Charles
                    Sydley. 1693.




THE SECOND PERIOD

THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY


SIR RICHARD STEELE, 1709

(1672-1729)

The play of “The London Cuckolds” was acted this evening before a
suitable audience, who were extremely well diverted with that heap of
vice and absurdity. The indignation which Eugenio, who is a gentleman
of just taste, has, upon occasion of seeing human nature fall so low
in their delights, made him, I thought, expatiate upon the mention
of this play very agreeably. “Of all men living,” said he, “I pity
players (who must be men of good understanding to be capable of being
such) that they are obliged to repeat and assume proper gestures for
representing things, of which their reason must be ashamed, and which
they must disdain their audience for approving. The amendment of
these low gratifications is only to be made by people of condition,
by encouraging the presentation of the noble characters drawn by
Shakespeare and others, from whence it is impossible to return without
strong impressions of honour and humanity. On these occasions distress
is laid before us with all its causes and consequences, and our
resentment placed according to the merit of the persons afflicted. Were
dramas of this nature more acceptable to the taste of the town, men who
have genius would bend their studies to excel in them.”

                              _The Tatler_, No. 8, 28 April 1709.

    _The London Cuckolds_, by Edward Ravenscroft, first produced
    1682.


NICHOLAS ROWE, 1709

(1674-1718)

The delicacy of his taste, and the natural bent of his own genius
(equal, if not superior, to some of the best of theirs [the ancients]),
would certainly have led him to read and study them with so much
pleasure, that some of their fine images would naturally have
insinuated themselves into, and been mixed with his own writings; so
that his not copying at least something from them, may be an argument
of his never having read them. Whether his ignorance of the ancients
were a disadvantage to him or no, may admit of a dispute: for though
the knowledge of them might have made him more correct, yet it is not
improbable but that the regularity and deference for them, which would
have attended that correctness, might have restrained some of that
fire, impetuosity, and even beautiful extravagance, which we admire in
Shakespeare: and I believe we were better pleased with those thoughts,
altogether new and uncommon, which his own imagination supplied him so
abundantly with, than if he had given us the most beautiful passages
out of the Greek and Latin poets, and that in the most agreeable manner
that it was possible for a master of the English language to deliver
them.

                  _Some Account of the Life, etc., of Mr. William
                      Shakespear_, p. iii. prefixed to _Works of
                      Shakespeare_, ed. N. Rowe. 1709.

    Of this passage and the question of Shakespeare’s knowledge
    of the ancients, Theobald, who favoured the view that his
    acquaintance with classical writings was not inconsiderable,
    remarks in his preface, “The result of the controversy must
    certainly, either way, terminate to our author’s honour: how
    happily he could imitate them, if that point be allowed; or how
    gloriously he could think like them, without owing anything to
    imitation.”


ELIJAH FENTON, 1711

(1683-1730)

    Shakespeare, the genius of our isle, whose mind
    (The universal mirror of mankind)
    Express’d all images, enrich’d the stage,
    But sometimes stoop’d to please a barbarous age.
    When his immortal bays began to grow,
    Rude was the language, and the humour low:
    He, like the God of Day, was always bright,
    But rolling in its course, his orb of light
    Was sullied, and obscur’d, though soaring high,
    With spots contracted from the nether sky.
    But whither is th’ adventurous Muse betray’d?
    Forgive her rashness, venerable shade!
    May Spring with purple flowers perfume thy urn;
    And Avon with his greens thy grave adorn:
    Be all thy faults, whatever faults there be,
    Imputed to the times, and not to thee.
      Some scions shot from this immortal root,
    Their tops much lower, and less fair the fruit,
    Jonson the tribute of my verse might claim,
    Had he not strove to blemish Shakespeare’s name.
    But, like the radiant twins that gild the sphere,
    Fletcher and Beaumont next in pomp appear:
    The first a fruitful vine, in blooming pride,
    Had been by superfluity destroy’d,
    But that his friend, judiciously severe,
    Prun’d the luxuriant boughs with artful care;
    On various sounding harps the Muses play’d,
    And sung, and quaff’d their nectar in the shade.
      Few moderns in the lists with these may stand,
    For in those days were giants in the land:
    Suffice it now by lineal right to claim,
    And bow with filial awe to Shakespeare’s fame;
    The second honours are a glorious name.
    Achilles dead, they found no equal lord
    To wear his armour, and to wield his sword.

                        _An Epistle to Mr. Southerne, from Kent._
                            January 28, 1710-11.


JOHN DENNIS, 1712

(1657-1734)

Shakespeare was one of the greatest geniuses that the world e’er saw
for the Tragic Stage. Though he lay under greater disadvantages than
any of his successors, yet had he greater and more genuine beauties
than the best and greatest of them. And what makes the brightest glory
of his character, those beauties were entirely his own, and owing to
the force of his own nature; whereas his faults were owing to his
education, and to the age that he lived in. One may say of him as they
did of Homer, that he had none to imitate, and is himself inimitable.

              _An Essay on the Genius and Writings of Shakespear:
                  with some Letters of Criticism to the
                  SPECTATOR._ 1712, pp. 1, 2.


EDWARD YOUNG, 1712

(1683-1765)

    To claim attention, and the heart invade,
    Shakespeare but _wrote_ the play th’ Almighty _made_.
    Our neighbour’s stage art too bare-fac’d betrays,
    ’Tis great Corneille at every scene we praise;
    On nature’s surer aid Britannia calls,
    None think of Shakespeare till the curtain falls;
    Then with a sigh returns our audience home,
    From Venice, Egypt, Persia, Greece, or Rome.

      .       .       .       .       .       .

    And yet in Shakespeare something still I find,
    That makes me less esteem all humankind;
    He made one nature and another found,
    Both in his page with master-strokes abound;
    His witches, fairies, and enchanted isle,
    Bid us no longer at our nurses smile;
    Of lost historians we almost complain,
    Nor think it the creation of his brain.

                    _Epistle to the Right Honourable George, Lord
                        Lansdowne._ 1712, ll. 295-302 and 313-20.


JOSEPH ADDISON, 1714

(1672-1719)

Our critics do not seem sensible that there is more beauty in the works
of a great genius who is ignorant of the rules of art, than in those
of a little genius who knows and observes them. It is of these men
of genius that Terence speaks in opposition to the little artificial
cavillers of his time:

    _Quorum æmulari exoptat negligentiam
    Potius quam istorum obscuram diligentiam._

A critic may have the same consolation in the ill success of his play,
as Dr. South tells us a physician has at the death of a patient,
that he was killed _secundum artem_. Our inimitable Shakespeare is a
stumbling-block to the whole tribe of these rigid critics. Who would
not rather read one of his plays, where there is not a single rule of
the stage observed, than any production of a modern critic, where there
is not one of them violated? Shakespeare was indeed born with all the
seeds of poetry, and may be compared to the stone in Pyrrhus’s ring,
which, as Pliny tells us, had the figure of Apollo and the nine Muses
in the veins of it, produced by the spontaneous hand of Nature, without
any help from art.

                          _The Spectator_, No. 592, 10 Feb. 1714.


ALEXANDER POPE, 1725

(1688-1744)

If ever any author deserved the name of an _Original_, it was
Shakespeare. Homer himself drew not his art so immediately from the
fountains of Nature; it proceeded through Egyptian strainers and
channels, and came to him not without some tincture of the learning, or
some cast of the models, of those before him. The poetry of Shakespeare
was inspiration indeed; he is not so much an imitator as an instrument
of Nature: and it is not so just to say that he speaks from her, as
that she speaks through him.

His _characters_ are so much Nature herself, that ’tis a sort of injury
to call them by so distant a name as copies of her. Those of other
poets have a constant resemblance, which shows that they received them
from one another, and were but multipliers of the same image; each
picture, like a mock rainbow, is but the reflection of a reflection.
But every single character in Shakespeare is as much an individual as
those in life itself; it is as impossible to find any two alike; as
such as from their relation or affinity in any respect appear most to
be twins, will upon comparison be found remarkably distinct. To this
life and variety of character we must add the wonderful preservation of
it, which is such throughout his Plays, that, had all the speeches been
printed without the very names of the persons, I believe one might have
applied them with certainty to every speaker.

The power over our passions was never possessed in a more eminent
degree, or displayed in so different instances. Yet all along there is
seen no labour, no pains to raise them; no preparation to guide our
guess to the effect, or be perceiv’d to lead toward it; but the heart
swells, and the tears burst out, just at the proper places. We are
surprised the moment we weep; and yet upon reflection find the passion
so just, that we should be surprised if we had not wept, and wept at
that very moment.

How astonishing is it, again, that the passions directly opposite to
these, laughter and spleen, are no less at his command! that he is not
more a master of the _great_ than of the _ridiculous_ in human nature;
of our noblest tendernesses, than of our vainest foibles; of our
strongest emotions, than of our idlest sensations!

Nor does he only excel in the passions: in the coolness of reflection
and reasoning he is full as admirable. His _sentiments_ are not only
in general the most pertinent and judicious upon every subject; but by
a talent very peculiar, something between penetration and felicity,
he hits upon that particular point on which the bent of each argument
turns, or the force of each motive depends. This is perfectly amazing,
from a man of no education or experience in those great and public
scenes of life which are usually the subject of his thoughts: so that
he seems to have known the world by intuition, to have looked through
human nature at one glance, and to be the only author that gives ground
for a very new opinion: That the philosopher, and even the man of the
world, may be _born_, as well as the poet.

It must be owned that with all these great excellencies, he has almost
as great defects; and that as he has certainly written better, so he
has perhaps written worse, than any other. But I think I can in some
measure account for these defects, from several causes and accidents;
without which it is hard to imagine that so large and so enlightened
a mind could ever have been susceptible of them. That all these
contingencies should unite to his disadvantage seems to me almost as
singularly unlucky, as that so many various (nay contrary) talents
should meet in one man, was happy and extraordinary.

  .       .       .       .       .       .       .

I will conclude by saying of Shakespeare, that with all his faults,
and with all the irregularity of his _drama_, one may look upon his
works in comparison of those that are more finished and regular, as
upon an ancient majestic piece of Gothic architecture compared with a
neat modern building; the latter is more elegant and glaring, but the
former is more strong and more solemn. It must be allowed, that in one
of these there are materials enough to make many of the other. It has
much the greater variety, and much the nobler apartments; though we are
often conducted to them by dark, odd, and uncouth passages. Nor does
the whole fail to strike us with greater reverence, though many of the
parts are childish, ill-placed, and unequal to its grandeur.

                     Preface to _The Works of Shakespeare_. 1725.

    De Quincey in his essay on Pope says of this preface: “For the
    edition we have little to plead; but for the editor it is but
    just to make three apologies. In the _first_ place he wrote a
    brilliant preface, which, although (like other works of the
    same class) too much occupied in displaying his own ability,
    and too often, for the sake of an effective antithesis, doing
    deep injustice to Shakespeare, yet undoubtedly, as a whole,
    extended his fame, by giving the sanction and countersign of
    a great wit to the national admiration. _Secondly_, as Dr.
    Johnson admits, Pope’s failure pointed out the right road to
    his successors. _Thirdly_, even in this failure it is but fair
    to say, that in a graduated scale of merit, as distributed
    amongst the long succession of editors through that century,
    Pope holds a rank proportionable to his age. For the year 1720,
    he is no otherwise below Theobald, Hanmer, Capell, Warburton,
    or even Johnson, than as they are successively below each
    other, and all of them as to accuracy below Steevens, as he
    again was below Malone and Reed.”


JAMES THOMSON, 1727

(1700-1748)

    Happy Britannia! where the Queen of Arts,
    Inspiring vigour, Liberty abroad
    Walks unconfined, even to thy farthest cots,
    And scatters plenty with unsparing hand

      .       .       .       .       .       .

    Thy sons of glory many! Alfred thine,
    In whom the splendour of heroic war,
    And more heroic peace, when govern’d well,
    Combine; whose hallow’d name _the Virtues Saint_,
    And his own Muses love; the best of kings!

      .       .       .       .       .       .

                            Fair thy renown
    In awful sages and in noble bards;
    Soon as the light of dawning Science spread
    Her orient ray, and waked the Muses’ song.

      .       .       .       .       .       .

                            For lofty sense,
    Creative fancy, and inspection keen
    Through the deep windings of the human heart,
    Is not wild Shakespeare thine and Nature’s boast?

                         _The Seasons: Summer._ 1727, ll. 1442-6,
                             1479-83, 1531-4, and 1563-6.


LEWIS THEOBALD, 1733

(1688-1744)

In how many points of light must we be obliged to gaze at this great
poet! In how many branches of excellence to consider and admire him!
Whether we view him on the side of art or nature, he ought equally to
engage our attention; whether we respect the force and greatness of his
genius, the extent of his knowledge and reading, the power and address
with which he throws out and applies either nature or learning, there
is ample scope both for our wonder and pleasure. If his diction and the
clothing of his thoughts attract us, how much more must we be charmed
with the richness and variety of his images and ideas! If his images
and ideas steal into our souls, and strike upon our fancy, how much are
they improved in price when we come to reflect with what propriety and
justness they are applied to character. If we look into his characters,
and how they are furnished and proportioned to the employment he cuts
out for them, how are we taken up with the mastery of his portraits!
What draughts of Nature! What variety of originals, and how differing
each from the other! How are they dressed from the stores of his own
luxurious imagination; without being the apes of mode, or borrowing
from any foreign wardrobe! each of them are the standard of fashion
for themselves: like gentlemen that are above the direction of their
tailors, and can adorn themselves without the aid of imitation.

              Preface to _The Works of Shakespeare, collated with
                  the Oldest Copies and corrected; with Notes,
                  Explanatory and Critical_. By Mr. Theobald.
                  1733, vol. i. pp. ii-iii.


JOSEPH WARTON, 1740

(1722-1800)

    What are the lays of artful Addison,
    Coldly correct, to Shakespeare’s warblings wild?
    Whom on the winding Avon’s willow’d banks
    Fair Fancy found, and bore the smiling babe
    To a close cavern (still the shepherds show
    The sacred place, whence with religious awe
    They hear, returning from the field at eve,
    Strange whisp’rings of sweet music through the air):
    Here, as with honey gather’d from the rock
    She fed the little prattler, and with songs
    Oft sooth’d his wond’ring ears with deep delight.
    On her soft lap he sat, and caught the sounds.

            _The Enthusiast: or the Lover of Nature_, ll. 168-79.


WILLIAM COLLINS, 1743

(1721-1759)

    Too nicely Jonson knew the critic’s part;
    Nature in him was almost lost in art.
    Of softer mould the gentle Fletcher came,
    The next in order, as the next in name:
    With pleas’d attention ’midst his scenes we find
    Each glowing thought that warms the female mind;
    Each melting sigh and every tender tear,
    The lover’s wishes, and the virgin’s fear.
    His every strain the smiles and graces own,
    But stronger Shakespeare felt for man alone:
    Drawn by his pen, our ruder passions stand
    Th’ unrival’d picture of his early hand.

             _Verses humbly address’d to Sir Thomas Hanmer on his
                 Edition of Shakespeare’s Works._ 1743, p. 7.

    Hanmer’s edition of Shakespeare appeared in 1744. See p. 93.


SIR THOMAS HANMER, 1744

(1677-1746)

If that rich vein of sense which runs through the works of this author
can be retrieved in every part and brought to appear in its true
light, and if it may be hoped without presumption that this is here
effected; they who love and admire him will receive a new pleasure,
and all probably will be more ready to join in doing him justice, who
does great honour to his country as a rare and perhaps singular genius:
one who hath attained an high degree of perfection in those two great
branches of poetry, tragedy and comedy, different as they are in their
natures from each other; and who may be said without partiality to have
equalled, if not excelled, in both kinds, the best writers of any age
or century who have thought it glory enough to distinguish themselves
in either.

           Preface to _The Works of Shakespear. Carefully Revised
               and Corrected by the former Editions, and Adorned
               with Sculptures designed and executed by the best
               hands._ Oxford, 1744, vol. i. pp. v-vi.


SAMUEL JOHNSON, 1747

(1709-1784)

    When Learning’s triumph o’er her barb’rous foes
    First rear’d the stage, immortal Shakespeare rose;
    Each change of many-coloured life he drew,
    Exhausted worlds, and then imagined new:
    Existence saw him spurn her bounded reign,
    And panting Time toil’d after him in vain:
    His powerful strokes presiding truth impress’d,
    And unresisted passion storm’d the breast.

                 Prologue spoken by Mr. Garrick at the opening of
                     the Theatre in Drury Lane, 1747.

    “Drinking tea one day at Garrick’s with Mr. Langton, he [Dr.
    Johnson] was questioned if he was not somewhat of a heretic as
    to Shakespeare; said Garrick, ‘I doubt he is a little of an
    infidel.’—‘Sir,’ said Johnson, ‘I will stand by the lines I
    have written on Shakespeare in my Prologue at the opening of
    your Theatre.’ Mr. Langton suggested, that in the line

        “‘And panting Time toil’d after him in vain,’

    Johnson might have had in his eye the passage in the _Tempest_,
    where Prospero says of Miranda:

        “‘. . . She will outstrip all praise,
          And make it halt behind her.’

    Johnson said nothing. Garrick then ventured to observe, ‘I do
    not think that the happiest line in the praise of Shakespeare.’
    Johnson exclaimed (smiling), ‘Prosaical rogues! next time I
    write, I’ll make both time and space pant.’”—Notes by Langton
    in Boswell’s _Life of Dr. Johnson_.


BISHOP WILLIAM WARBURTON, 1747.

(1698-1779)

Of all the literary exercitations of speculative men, whether designed
for the use or entertainment of the world, there are none of so much
importance, or what are more our immediate concern, than those which
let us into the knowledge of our nature. Others may exercise the reason
or amuse the imagination; but these only can improve the heart, and
form the human mind to wisdom. Now, in this science, our Shakespeare is
confessed to occupy the foremost place; whether we consider the amazing
sagacity with which he investigates every hidden spring and wheel of
human action; or his happy manner of communicating this knowledge,
in the just and living paintings which he has given us of all our
passions, appetites, and pursuits. These afford a lesson which can
never be too often repeated, or too constantly inculcated.

            Preface to _The Works of Shakespear. The genuine Text
                (collated with all the former Editions and then
                corrected and emended) is here settled. Being
                restored from the Blunders of the first Editors,
                and the Interpolations of the two last. With a
                Comment and Notes, Critical and Explanatory._
                By Mr. Pope and Mr. Warburton. 1747, vol. i. p.
                xxiv.


CHRISTOPHER SMART, 1751

(1722-1771)

    Methinks I see with fancy’s magic eye,
    The shade of Shakespeare, in yon azure sky.
    On yon high cloud behold the bard advance,
    Piercing all nature with a single glance:
    In various attitudes around him stand
    The passions, waiting for his dread command.
    First kneeling Love before his feet appears,
    And, musically sighing, melts in tears.
    Near him fell Jealousy with fury burns,
    And into storms the amorous breathings turns;
    Then Hope, with heavenward look, and Joy draw near,
    While palsied Terror trembles in the rear.

                    Prologue to _Othello_, as it was acted at the
                        Theatre Royal in Drury Lane on Thursday
                        the 7th of March 1751 by Persons of
                        Distinction for their Diversion. Ll.
                        21-32.


DAVID HUME, 1754.

(1711-1774)

If Shakespeare be considered as a MAN, born in a rude age, and
educated in the lowest manner, without any instruction, either from the
world or from books, he may be regarded as a prodigy. If represented
as a POET, capable of furnishing a proper entertainment to a
refined or intelligent audience, we must abate much of this eulogy.
In his compositions, we regret, that many irregularities, and even
absurdities, should so frequently disfigure the animated and passionate
scenes intermixed with them; and at the same time, we perhaps admire
the more those beauties, on account of their being surrounded with
such deformities. A striking peculiarity of sentiment, adapted to a
single character, he frequently hits, as it were, by inspiration; but a
reasonable propriety of thought he cannot for any time uphold. Nervous
and picturesque expressions as well as descriptions abound in him; but
it is in vain we look either for purity or simplicity of diction. His
total ignorance of all theatrical art and conduct, however material a
defect, yet, as it affects the spectator rather than the reader, we can
more easily excuse, than that want of taste which often prevails in his
productions, and which gives way only by intervals to the irradiations
of genius. A great and fertile genius he certainly possessed, and one
enriched equally with a tragic and comic vein; but he ought to be cited
as a proof, how dangerous it is to rely on these advantages alone for
attaining an excellence in the finer arts. And there may even remain a
suspicion, that we over-rate, if possible, the greatness of his genius;
in the same manner as bodies often appear more gigantic, on account
of their being disproportioned and misshapen. He died in 1616, aged
fifty-three years.

Jonson possessed all the learning which was wanting to Shakespeare,
and wanted all the genius of which the other was possessed. Both of
them were equally deficient in taste and elegance, in harmony and
correctness. A servile copyist of the ancients, Jonson translated into
bad English the beautiful passages of the Greek and Roman authors,
without accommodating to the manners of his age and country. His merit
has been totally eclipsed by that of Shakespeare, whose rude genius
prevailed over the rude art of his contemporary. The English theatre
has ever since taken a strong tincture of Shakespeare’s spirit and
character; and thence it has proceeded, that the nation has undergone
from all its neighbours the reproach of barbarism, from which its
valuable productions in some parts of learning would otherwise have
exempted it.

                    _Appendix to the Reign of James I. History of
                        England from the Invasion of Julius Cæsar
                        to the Revolution in 1688._ 1754.


HORACE WALPOLE, EARL OF ORFORD, 1756

(1717-1797)

John and I are just going to Garrick’s with a grove of cypresses in our
hands, like the Kentish men at the Conquest. He has built a temple to
his master Shakespeare, and I am going to adorn the outside, since his
modesty would not let me decorate it within, as I proposed, with these
mottoes:

    _Quod spiro et placeo, si placeo, tuum est._

    That I spirit have and nature,
    That sense breathes in ev’ry feature,
    That I please, if please I do,—
    Shakespeare,—all I owe to you.

                          Letter to George Montagu, 14 Oct. 1756.
                              _Letters_, ed. Peter Cunningham,
                              1857, vol. iii. p. 36.


JOHN ARMSTRONG, 1758

(1709-1779)

Shakespeare, who I will venture to say had the most musical ear of
all the English poets, is abundantly irregular in his versification:
but his wildest licences seldom hurt the ear; on the contrary, they
give his verse a spirit and variety, which prevent its ever cloying.
Our modern tragedy-writers, instead of using the advantages of their
own languages, seem in general to imitate the monotony of the French
versification: and the only licence they ever venture upon, is that
poor tame one the supernumerary syllable at the end of a line; which
they are apt to manage in such a manner as to give their verse a most
ungraceful halt. But it is not want of ear alone which makes our common
manufacturers of tragedy so insipidly solemn and so void of harmony: it
is want of feeling.

                       “Of the Versification of English Tragedy.”
                           _Works_, 1770, ii. 164-5.


Shakespeare, indeed, without one perfect plan, has perhaps excelled all
other dramatic poets as to detached scenes. But he was a wonder!—His
deep knowledge of human nature, his prodigious variety of fancy and
invention, and of characters drawn with the strongest, truest, and most
exquisite strokes, oblige you to forget his most violent irregularities.

                          Of the Dramatic Unities, _ib._, p. 242.


WILLIAM MASON, 1759

(1724-1797)

    How oft I cried, “Oh come, thou tragic queen!
      March from thy Greece with firm majestic tread!
    Such as when Athens saw thee fill her scene,
      When Sophocles thy choral graces led:
    Saw thy proud pall its purple length devolve;
      Saw thee uplift the glittering dagger high;
    Ponder with fixed brow thy deep resolve,
      Prepar’d to strike, to triumph, and to die.
    Bring then to Britain’s plain that choral throng;
      Display thy buskin’d pomp, thy golden lyre;
    Give her historic forms the soul of song,
      And mingle Attic art with Shakespeare’s fire.”
    “Ah, what, fond boy, dost thou presume to claim?”
      The Muse replied, “mistaken suppliant, know,
    To light in Shakespeare’s breast the dazzling flame
      Exhausted all Parnassus could bestow.
    True, art remains; and if from his bright page
      Thy mimic power one vivid beam can seize,
    Proceed; and in that best of tasks engage,
      Which tends at once to profit, and to please.”

                                              _Caractacus_, 1759.


THOMAS GRAY, 1759

(1716-1771)

    Far from the sun and summer-gale,
    In thy green lap [_i.e._ Albion’s] was Nature’s darling laid,
    What time, where lucid Avon strayed,
    To him the mighty mother did unveil
    Her awful face: The dauntless child
    Stretch’d forth his little arms, and smil’d.
    This pencil take (she said) whose colours clear
    Richly paint the vernal year:
    Thine too these golden keys, immortal boy!
    This can unlock the gates of Joy;
    Of Horror that, and thrilling Fears,
    Or ope the sacred source of sympathetic Tears.

                   _The Progress of Poesy. A Pindaric Ode_, 1759,
                       iii. 1.


DAVID MALLET, 1759

(1705?-1765)

    Pride of his own, and wonder of this age,
    Who first created, and yet rules, the Stage,
    Bold to design, all powerful to express,
    Shakespear each passion drew in every dress:
    Great above rule, and imitating none;
    Rich without borrowing, nature was his own.
    Yet is his sense debas’d by gross alloy:
    As gold in mines lies mix’d with dirt and clay.
    Now, eagle-wing’d, his heavenward flight he takes;
    The big stage thunders, and the soul awakes:
    Now, low on earth, a kindred reptile creeps;
    Sad Hamlet quibbles, and the hearer sleeps.

                                _Of Verbal Criticism_, ll. 47-58.
                                    _Works_, 1759, vol. i. p. 21.


EDWARD YOUNG, 1759

(1683-1765)

Who knows whether Shakespeare might not have thought less, if he had
read more? Who knows if he might not have laboured under the load of
Jonson’s learning, as Enceladus under Ætna? His mighty genius, indeed,
though the most mountainous oppression, would have breathed out some
of his inextinguishable fire; yet possibly he might not have risen up
into that giant, that much more than common man, at which we now gaze
with amazement and delight. Perhaps he was as learned as his dramatic
province required; for whatever other learning he wanted, he was master
of two books unknown to many of the profoundly read, though books which
the last conflagration alone can destroy: the book of Nature, and that
of Man.

                     _Conjectures on Original Composition._ 1759.


MARK AKENSIDE, _c._ 1760

(1721-1770)

“_An Inscription._”

    O youths and virgins: O declining eld:
    O pale misfortune’s slaves: O ye who dwell
    Unknown with humble quiet; ye who wait
    In courts, or fill the golden seat of kings:
    O sons of sport and pleasure: O thou wretch
    That weep’st for jealous love, or the sore wounds
    Of conscious guilt, or death’s rapacious hand
    Which left thee void of hope: O ye who roam
    In exile; ye who through th’ embattl’d field
    Seek bright renown; or who for nobler palms
    Contend, the leaders of a public cause;
    Approach: behold this marble. Know ye not
    The features? Hath not oft his faithful tongue
    Told you the fashion of your own estate,
    The secrets of your bosom? Here then round
    His monument with reverence while ye stand,
    Say to each other: “This was Shakespeare’s form;
    Who walk’d in every path of human life,
    Felt every passion; and to all mankind
    Doth now, will ever, that experience yield
    Which his own genius only could acquire.”

                           _Poetical Works._ 1805, ii. pp. 136-7.


ROBERT LLOYD, 1760

(1733-1764)

    When Shakespeare leads the mind a dance,
    From France to England, hence to France,
    Talk not to me of time and place;
    I own I’m happy in the chase.
    Whether the drama’s here or there,
    ’Tis nature, Shakespeare, everywhere.
    The poet’s fancy can create,
    Contract, enlarge, annihilate,
    Bring past and present close together,
    In spite of distance, seas, or weather;
    And shut up in a single action
    What cost whole years in its transaction.
    So, ladies at a play or rout,
    Can flirt the universe about,
    Whose geographical account
    Is drawn and pictured on the mount:
    Yet when they please, contract the plan,
    And shut the world up in a fan.

                        _Shakespeare: An Epistle to Mr. Garrick._
                            1760, ll. 37-54.

    See also Lloyd’s _Ode to Genius_, 1760, ll. 1-14.


EDWARD CAPELL, 1760

(1713-1781)

It is said of the ostrich, that she drops her egg at random, to be
disposed of as chance pleases; either brought up to maturity by
the sun’s kindly warmth, or else crushed by beasts and the feet of
passers-by: such, at least, is the account which naturalists have
given us of this extraordinary bird; and admitting it for a truth, she
is in this a fit emblem of almost every great genius: they conceive
and produce with ease those noble issues of human understanding; but
incubation, the dull work of putting them correctly upon paper and
afterwards publishing, is a task they cannot away with. If the original
state of all such authors’ writings, even from Homer downward, could
be inquired into and known, they would yield proof in abundance of the
justness of what is here asserted: but the author now before us shall
suffice for them all; being at once the greatest instance of genius
in producing noble things, and of negligence in providing for them
afterwards.

               Preface to _Mr. William Shakespeare, his Comedies,
                   Histories, and Tragedies set out by himself in
                   quarto or by the Players his Fellows in folio,
                   and now faithfully republished from those
                   Editions in ten volumes octavo; with an
                   Introduction, etc._ 1760, vol. i. pp. 1-2.

    Of this preface Dr. Johnson remarked: “If the man would have
    come to me, I would have endeavoured to endow his purpose with
    words, for as it is, he doth gabble monstrously.”—Boswell’s
    _Life of Dr. Johnson_, iii. 251, 2nd ed.


CHARLES CHURCHILL, 1761

(1731-1764)

    In the first seat, in robe of various dyes,
    A noble wildness flashing from his eyes,
    Sat Shakespeare.—In one hand a wand he bore,
    For mighty wonders fam’d in days of yore;
    The other held a globe, which to his will
    Obedient turn’d, and own’d the master’s skill:
    Things of the noblest kind his genius drew,
    And look’d through Nature at a single view:
    A loose he gave to his unbounded soul,
    And taught new lands to rise, new seas to roll;
    Call’d into being scenes unknown before,
    And, passing Nature’s bounds, was something more.

                                     _The Rosciad_, 1761, l. 259.


WILLIAM WHITEHEAD, 1762

(1715-1785)

    But chief avoid the boisterous roaring sparks,
    The sons of fire!—you’ll know them by their marks.
    Fond to be heard, they always court a crowd,
    And, though ’tis borrow’d nonsense, talk it loud.
    One epithet supplies their constant chime,
    Damn’d bad, damn’d good, damn’d low, or damn’d sublime.
    But most in quick short repartee they shine,
    Of local humour; or from plays purloin
    Each quaint stale scrap which every subject hits,
    Till fools almost imagine, they are wits.
    Hear them on Shakespeare! there they foam, they rage!
    Yet taste not half the beauties of his page,
    Nor see that art, as well as nature strove,
    To place him foremost in th’ Aonian grove.
    For there, there only, where the sisters join,
    His genius triumphs, and the work’s divine.
    Or would ye sift more near these sons of fire,
    ’Tis Garrick, and not Shakespeare, they admire,
    Without his breath, inspiring every thought,
    They ne’er perhaps had known what Shakespeare wrote;
    Without his eager, his becoming zeal,
    To teach them, though they scarce know why, to feel,
    A crude unmeaning mass had Jonson been,
    And a dead letter Shakespeare’s noblest scene.

                      _A Charge to the Poets._ 1762, ll. 167-190.


WILLIAM THOMPSON, 1763

(1712?-1766?)

“_In Shakespeare’s Walk._”

    By yon hills, with morning spread,
    Lifting up the tufted head,
    By those golden waves of corn,
    Which the laughing fields adorn,
    By the fragrant breath of flowers,
    Stealing from the woodbine bowers,
    By this thought-inspiring shade,
    By the gleamings of the glade,
    By the babblings of the brook,
    Winding slow in many a crook,
    By the rustling of the trees,
    By the humming of the bees,
    By the woodlark, by the thrush,
    Wildly warbling from the bush,
    By the fairy’s shadowy tread
    O’er the cowslip’s dewy head,
    Father, monarch of the stage,
    Glory of Eliza’s age,
    Shakespeare! deign to lend thy face,
    This romantic nook to grace,
    Where untaught nature sports alone,
    Since thou and nature are but one.

                  _Garden Inscriptions. Poetical Calendar, 1763._
                      First reprinted in Anderson’s _Poets of
                      Great Britain_, 1794, vol. x. p. 993.


SAMUEL JOHNSON, 1765

(1709-1784)

The work of a correct and regular writer is a garden accurately formed
and diligently planted, varied with shades, and scented with flowers;
the composition of Shakespeare is a forest, in which oaks extend their
branches, and pines tower in the air, interspersed sometimes with weeds
and brambles, and sometimes giving shelter to myrtles and to roses;
filling the eye with awful pomp, and gratifying the mind with endless
diversity. Other poets display cabinets of precious rarities, minutely
finished, wrought into shape, and polished into brightness. Shakespeare
opens a mine which contains gold and diamonds in unexhaustible plenty,
though clouded by incrustations, debased by impurities, and mingled
with a mass of meaner minerals.

                          Preface to Shakespeare’s _Works_. 1765.

    In _The Rambler_, No. 156 (14 Sept. 1751), Johnson wrote:
    “Instead of vindicating tragi-comedy by the success of
    Shakespeare, we ought perhaps to pay new honours to that
    transcendent and unbounded genius that could preside over the
    passions in sport; who, to actuate the affections, needed
    not the slow gradation of common means, but could fill the
    heart with instantaneous jollity or sorrow, and vary our
    disposition as he changed his scenes. Perhaps the effects even
    of Shakespeare’s poetry might have been greater, had he not
    counteracted himself; and we might have been more interested
    in the distresses of his heroes, had we not been so frequently
    diverted by the jokes of his buffoons.”


GEORGE KEATE, 1768

(1729-1797)

    Yes! jealous wits may still for empire strive,
    Still keep the flames of critick rage alive:
    Our Shakespeare yet shall all his rights maintain,
    And crown the triumphs of Eliza’s reign,
    Above control, above each classick rule,
    His tutress Nature, and the World his school.
    On daring pinions borne, to him was given
    Th’ aerial range of Fancy’s brightest Heaven,
    To bid rapt thought o’er noblest heights aspire,
    And wake each passion with a Muse of Fire.
    Revere his genius—to the dead be just,
    And spare the laurels, that o’ershade the dust.
    Low sleeps the bard, _in cold obstruction laid_,
    Nor asks the chaplet from a rival’s head.
    O’er the dear vault, Ambition’s utmost bound,
    Unheard shall Fame her airy trumpet sound!
    Unheard alike, nor grief nor transport raise,
    Thy blast of censure, or thy note of praise!
    As Raphael’s own creation grac’d his hearse,
    And sham’d the pomp of ostentatious verse,
    Shall Shakespeare’s honours by himself be paid,
    And Nature perish ere his pictures fade.

                _Ferney: An Epistle to Monsr. De Voltaire._ 1768.
                    _Poetical Works_, 1781, pp. 136-7.

    _Raphael’s Own Creation_:—The TRANSFIGURATION, that
    well-known picture of RAPHAEL, was carried before
    his body to the grave, doing more real honour to his memory
    than either his epitaph in the Pantheon, the famous distich
    of CARDINAL BEMBO, or all the other adulatory verses
    written on the same occasion.—KEATE.


DAVID GARRICK, 1769

(1717-1779)

“_Warwickshire._”

    Ye _Warwickshire_ lads, and ye lasses,
    See what at our Jubilee passes;
    Come revel away, rejoice and be glad;
    For the lad of all lads, was a _Warwickshire_ lad,
          _Warwickshire_ lad,
          All be glad;
    For the lad of all lads, was a _Warwickshire_ lad.

    Be proud of the charms of your county,
    Where Nature has lavish’d her bounty;
    Where much she has giv’n, and some to be spar’d;
    For the bard of all bards, was a _Warwickshire_ bard,
          _Warwickshire_ bard,
          Never pair’d;
    For the bard of all bards, was a _Warwickshire_ bard.

    Each shire has its different pleasures,
    Each shire has its different treasures;
    But to rare _Warwickshire_, all must submit;
    For the wit of all wits, was a _Warwickshire_ wit,
          _Warwickshire_ wit,
          How he writ!
    For the wit of all wits, was a _Warwickshire_ wit.

    Old Ben, Thomas Otway, John Dryden,
    And half a score more we take pride in;
    Of famous Will Congreve, we boast too the skill;
    But the Will of all Wills, was _Warwickshire_ Will,
          _Warwickshire_ Will,
          Matchless still;
    For the Will of all Wills, was a _Warwickshire_ Will.

    Our Shakespeare compar’d is to no man—
    Nor Frenchman, nor Grecian, nor Roman;
    Their swans are all geese, to the Avon’s sweet swan;
    And the man of all men, was a _Warwickshire_ man,
          _Warwickshire_ man,
          Avon’s swan;
    And the man of all men, was a _Warwickshire_ man.

    As ven’son is very inviting,
    To steal it our bard took delight in.
    To make his friends merry he never was lag;
    And the wag of all wags, was a _Warwickshire_ wag,
          _Warwickshire_ wag,
          Ever brag;
    For the wag of all wags, was a _Warwickshire_ wag.

    There never was seen such a creature,
    Of all she was worth, he robbed Nature;
    He took all her smiles, and he took all her grief;
    And the thief of all thieves, was a _Warwickshire_ thief.
          _Warwickshire_ thief,
          He’s the chief;
    For the thief of all thieves, was a _Warwickshire_ chief.

                  “Warwickshire: a Song.” _Shakespeare’s Garland.
                      Being a Collection of New Songs, Ballads,
                      Roundelays, Catches, Glees, Comic
                      Serenades, etc., performed at the Jubilee
                      at Stratford-upon-Avon._ 1769, p. 2.


ANONYMOUS, 1769

“_To the Immortal Memory of Shakespeare._”

    Immortal be his name,
    His memory, his fame!
    Nature and her works we see,
    Matchless Shakespeare, full in thee!
    Join’d by everlasting ties,
    Shakespeare but with Nature dies.
    Immortal be his Name,
    His memory, his fame!

                _Shakespeare’s Garland. Being a Collection of New
                    Songs, Ballads, etc., performed at the
                    Jubilee at Stratford-upon-Avon._ 1769, p. 15.


WILLIAM RICHARDSON, 1774

(1743-1814)

No writer has hitherto appeared who possesses in a more eminent degree
than Shakespeare, the power of imitating the passions. All of them seem
familiar to him; the boisterous no less than the gentle; the benign no
less than the malignant. There are several writers, as there are many
players, who are successful in imitating some particular passions,
but who appear stiff, awkward, and unnatural, in the expression of
others. Some are capable of exhibiting very striking representations
of resolute and intrepid natures, but cannot so easily bend themselves
to those that are softer and more complacent. Others, again, seem full
of amiable affection and tenderness, but cannot exalt themselves to
the boldness of the hero, or magnanimity of the patriot. The genius
of Shakespeare is unlimited. Possessing extreme sensibility, and
uncommonly susceptible, he is the Proteus of the drama; he changes
himself into every character, and enters easily into every condition of
human nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many dramatic writers of different ages are capable, occasionally, of
breaking out, with great fervour of genius, in the natural language
of strong emotion. No writer of antiquity is more distinguished for
abilities of this kind than Euripides. His whole heart and soul seem
torn and agitated by the force of the passion he imitates. He ceases
to be Euripides; he is Medea; he is Orestes. Shakespeare, however, is
most eminently distinguished, not only by these occasional sallies, but
by imitating the passion in all its aspects, by pursuing it through
all its windings and labyrinths, by moderating or accelerating its
impetuosity according to the influence of other principles and of
external events, and finally by combining it in a judicious manner with
other passions and propensities, or by setting it aptly in opposition.
He thus unites the two essential powers of dramatic invention, that of
forming characters; and that of imitating in their natural expressions,
the passions and affections of which they are composed.

            _A Philosophical Analysis and Illustration of some of
                Shakespeare’s remarkable Characters._ 1774.
                Introduction, pp. 39-42.


WILLIAM JULIUS MICKLE, 1775

(1735-1788)

    When Heaven decreed to soothe the feuds that tore
      The wolf-eyed barons, whose unletter’d rage
    Spurn’d the fair muse, Heaven bade on Avon’s shore
      A Shakespeare rise, and soothe the barbarous age:
      A Shakespeare rose; the barbarous heats assuage.
    At distance due how many bards attend!
      Enlarged and liberal from the narrow cage
    Of blinded zeal, new manners wide extend,
    And o’er the generous breast the dews of heaven descend.

                 Introduction to _The Lusiad, or the Discovery of
                     India. An Epic Poem._ Translated, 1775.


WILLIAM HAYLEY, 1777

(1745-1820)

    When mighty Shakespeare to thy judging eye
    Presents that magic glass whose ample round
    Reflects each figure in Creation’s bound,
    And pours, in floods of supernatural light,
    Fancy’s bright beings on the charmed sight,
    This chief enchanter of the willing breast
    Will teach thee all the magic he possessed.
    Placed in his circle, mark in colours true
    Each brilliant being that he calls to view:
    Wrapt in the gloomy storm, or robed in light,
    His weird sister or his fairy sprite.
    Boldly o’erleaping, in the great design,
    The bounds of nature, with a guide divine.

                 _A Poetic Epistle to an Eminent Painter_ [George
                     Romney]. 2nd edition, 1779. Part II. ll.
                     472-84.


THOMAS WARTON, 1777

(1728-1790)

    Avon, thy rural view, thy pastures wild,
    The willows that o’erhang thy twilight edge,
    Their boughs entangling with the embattled sedge;
    Thy brink with watery foliage quaintly fring’d,
    Thy surface with reflected verdure ting’d;
    Soothe me with many a pensive pleasure mild.
    But while I muse, that here the bard divine,
    Whose sacred dust yon high arch’d aisles enclose,
    Where the tall windows rise in stately rows
    Above the embowering shade,
    Here first, at Fancy’s fairy-circled shrine,
    Of daisies pied his infant offering made;
    Here playful yet, in stripling years unripe,
    Fram’d of thy reeds a shrill and artless pipe:
    Sudden thy beauties, Avon, all are fled,
    As at the waving of some magic wand;
    An holy trance my charmed spirit wings,
    And awful shapes of warriors and of kings
    People the busy mead,
    Like spectres swarming to the wizard’s hall;
    And slowly pace, and point with trembling hand
    The wounds ill-cover’d with the purple pall.
    Before me Pity seems to stand
    A weeping mourner, smote with anguish sore,
    To see Misfortune rend in frantic mood
    His robe, with regal woes embroider’d o’er.
    Pale Terror leads the visionary band,
    And sternly shakes his sceptre dropping blood.

                       “Monody written near Stratford-upon-Avon.”
                           _Miscellaneous Odes._ 1777.


ANNA SEWARD, BEFORE 1782

(1747-1809)

“_On Shakespeare’s Monument at Stratford-upon-Avon._”

    Great Homer’s birth sev’n rival cities claim,
    Too mighty such monopoly of Fame;
    Yet not to birth alone did Homer owe
    His wondrous worth; what Egypt could bestow,
    With all the schools of Greece and Asia join’d,
    Enlarg’d th’ immense expansion of his mind.
    Nor yet unrival’d the Mæonian strain,
    The British Eagle and the Mantuan Swan
    Tow’r equal heights. But happier Stratford, thou
    With incontested laurels deck thy brow:
    Thy bard was thine _unschool’d_, and from thee brought
    More than all Egypt, Greece, or Asia taught.
    Not Homer’s self such matchless honours won;
    The Greek has rivals, but thy Shakespeare none.

                Dodsley’s _Collection of Poems by Several Hands_.
                    1782, ii. p. 315.

    “The British Eagle,” _i.e._ Milton.


WILLIAM LISLE BOWLES, 1794

(1762-1850)

“_On Shakespeare._”

    O sovereign master, who with lovely state
      Dost rule as in some isle’s enchanted land,
    On whom soft airs and shadowy spirits wait,
      Whilst scenes of faerie bloom at thy command!
    On thy wild shores forgetful could I lie,
    And list, till earth dissolved, to thy sweet minstrelsy!

    Called by thy magic from the hoary deep,
      Aërial forms should in bright troops ascend,
    And then a wondrous masque before me sweep;
      While sounds _that the earth owned not_, seem to blend
    Their stealing melodies, that when the strain
    Ceased, _I should weep, and would so dream again_!

    The charm is wound: I see an aged form,
      In white robes, on the winding sea-shore stand;
      O’er the careering surge he waves his wand:
    Upon the black rock bursts the bidden storm.
    Now from bright opening clouds I hear a lay,
    _Come to these yellow sands, fair stranger, come away_.

      Saw ye pass by the weird sisters pale?
    Marked ye the lowering castle on the heath?
    Hark! hark! is the deed done? the deed of death!
      The deed is done—hail, king of Scotland, hail!
    I see no more;—to many a fearful sound
    The bloody cauldron sinks, and all is dark around.

    Pity! touch the trembling strings,
    A maid, a beauteous maniac, wildly sings:
    “They laid him in the ground so cold,
      Upon his breast the earth is thrown;
    High is heaped the grassy mould,
      _Oh! he is dead and gone_.
    The winds of the winter blow o’er his cold breast,
    But pleasant shall be his rest.”

    The song is ceased. Ah! who, pale shade, art thou,
      Sad raving to the rude tempestuous night?
    Sure thou hast had much wrong, so stern thy brow;
      So piteous thou dost tear thy tresses white;
    So wildly thou dost cry, “_Blow, bitter wind,
    Ye elements, I call not _you_ unkind_.”

    Beneath the shade of nodding branches grey,
      And rude romantic woods, and glens forlorn,
    The merry hunters wear the hours away;
      Rings the deep forest to the joyous horn!
    Joyous to all, but him who with sad look
    Hangs idly musing by the brawling brook.

    But mark the merry elves of fairy land!
      To the high moon’s gleamy glance,
      They with shadowy morris dance;
    Soft music dies along the desert sand;
      Soon at peep of cold-eyed day
      Soon the numerous lights decay;
        Merrily, now merrily,
        After the dewy moon they fly.

    Let rosy laughter now advance,
      And wit with sparkling eye,
      Where quaint powers lurking lie
    Bright fancy, the queen of the revels, shall dance,
      And point to the frolicsome train
      And antic forms that flit unnumbered o’er the plain.

    O sovereign master! at whose sole command
      We start with terror, or with pity weep;
    O! where is now thy all-creating wand?
      Buried ten thousand fathoms in the deep.
    The staff is broke, the powerful spell is fled,
    And never earthly guest shall in thy circle tread.

                        _Sonnets, with other Poems._ 3rd edition.
                            1794, pp. 67-70.

    This poem appears in later editions of Bowle’s sonnets in a
    different form. Stanza 9 is omitted, and the remaining stanzas
    are arranged thus: 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 3, 4, 5, 10:

    “Come to these yellow sands.” Ferdinand. See _The Tempest_.

    “The weird sisters.” See _Macbeth_.

    “A beauteous maniac.” Ophelia. See _Hamlet_.

    “Blow, bitter wind.” See _King Lear_.

    “Him, who with sad look.” Jacques. See _As You Like It_.

    “Elves of fairy land.” See _Midsummer Night’s Dream_.




THE THIRD PERIOD

NINETEENTH CENTURY


WILLIAM WORDSWORTH, 1802

(1770-1850)

    It is not to be thought of that the flood
      Of British freedom, which, to the open sea
      Of the world’s praise, from dark antiquity
    Hath flowed “with pomp of waters unwithstood,”
    Roused though it be full often to a mood
      Which spurns the check of salutary bands,
      That this most famous stream in bogs and sands
    Should perish; and to evil and to good
    Be lost for ever. In our halls is hung
      Armoury of the invincible knights of old:
    We must be free or die, who speak the tongue
      That Shakspeare spake; the faith and morals hold
    Which Milton held. In everything we are sprung
      Of Earth’s first blood, have titles manifold.

                   “Sonnets dedicated to Liberty.” _Poems._ 1807.


FELICIA DOROTHEA HEMANS, 1804

(1793-1835)

“_Shakespeare._”

    I love to rove o’er history’s page,
    Recall the hero and the sage;
    Revive the actions of the dead,
    And memory of ages fled:
    Yet it yields me greater pleasure
    To read the poet’s pleasing measure.
    Led by Shakespeare, bard inspired,
    The bosom’s energies are fired;
    We learn to shed the generous tear
    O’er poor Ophelia’s sacred bier;
    To love the merry moonlit scene,
    With fairy elves in valleys green;
    Or borne on fancy’s heavenly wings,
    To listen while sweet Ariel sings.
    How sweet the native wood notes wild
    Of him, the Muse’s favourite child!
    Of him whose magic lays impart
    Each various feeling to the heart.

                _Poems._ By Felicia Dorothea Browne, 1808, p. 48.

    One of Mrs. Hemans’ earliest tastes—relates her sister in her
    _Memoirs_—was a passion for Shakespeare, which she read as her
    choicest recreation at six years old. The above lines were
    written when she was eleven years of age.


SIR WALTER SCOTT, 1814

(1771-1832)

The English stage might be considered as equally without rule and
without model when Shakespeare arose. The effect of the genius of an
individual upon the taste of a nation is mighty; but that genius, in
its turn, is formed according to the opinions prevalent at the period
when it comes into existence. Such was the case with Shakespeare. With
an education more extensive, and a taste refined by the classical
models, it is probable that he also, in admiration of the ancient
drama, might have mistaken the form for the essence, and subscribed to
those rules which had produced such masterpieces of art. Fortunately
for the full exertion of a genius as comprehensive and versatile,
as intense and powerful, Shakespeare had no access to any models of
which the commanding merit might have controlled and limited his own
exertions. He followed the path which a nameless crowd of obscure
writers had trodden before him; but he moved in it with the grace and
majestic step of a being of a superior order, and vindicated for ever
the British theatre from a pedantic restriction to classical rule.
Nothing went before Shakespeare which in any respect was fit to fix
and stamp the character of a national drama; and certainly no one will
succeed him, capable of establishing by mere authority, a form more
restricted than that which Shakespeare used.

                   Article on “Drama,” _Encyclopædia Britannica_.
                       4th ed. 1814. 6th ed. vol. viii. p. 157.


SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE, 1817

(1772-1834)

No man was ever yet a great poet, without being at the same time a
profound philosopher. For poetry is the blossom and the fragrancy
of all human knowledge, human thoughts, human passions, emotions,
language. In Shakespeare’s POEMS, the creative power, and the
intellectual energy, wrestle as in a war embrace. Each in its excess
of strength seems to threaten the extinction of the other. At length
in the DRAMA they were reconciled, and fought each with its
shield before the breast of the other. Or, like two rapid streams, that
at their first meeting within narrow and rocky banks, mutually strive
to repel each other, and intermix reluctantly and in tumult; but soon
finding a wider channel and more yielding shores, blend, and dilate,
and flow on in one current and with one voice. The “Venus and Adonis”
did not, perhaps, allow the display of the deeper passions. But the
story of Lucretia seems to favour, and even demand their intensest
workings. And yet we find in _Shakespeare’s_ management of the tale,
neither pathos, nor any other _dramatic_ quality. There is the same
minute and faithful imagery as in the former poem, in the same vivid
colours, inspirited by the same impetuous vigour of thought, and
diverging and contracting with the same activity of the assimilative
and of the modifying faculties; and with a yet larger display, a
yet wider range of knowledge and reflection; and, lastly, with the
same perfect dominion, often _domination_, over the whole world of
language. What then shall we say? even this: that—

Shakespeare, no mere child of nature; no automaton of genius; no
passive vehicle of inspiration possessed by the spirit, not possessing
it; first studied patiently, meditated deeply, understood minutely,
till knowledge, become habitual and intuitive, wedded itself to his
habitual feelings, and at length gave birth to that stupendous power,
by which he stands alone, with no equal or second in his own class; to
that power, which seated him on one of the two glory-smitten summits
of the poetic mountain, with Milton as his compeer, not rival. While
the former darts himself forth, and passes into all the forms of human
character and passion, to one Proteus of the fire and the flood; the
other attracts all forms and things to himself, in the unity of his
own IDEAL. All things and modes of action shape themselves anew in the
being of MILTON; while SHAKESPEARE becomes all things, yet for ever
remaining himself. O what great men hast thou not produced, England! my
country!

                          _Biographia Literaria._ 1817, chap. xv.

    The following is from Coleridge’s _Literary Remains_, ed.
    Henry Nelson Coleridge, 1867, ii. pp. 68-69:—I greatly dislike
    beauties and selections in general; but as proof positive of
    his unrivalled excellence, I should like to try Shakespeare
    by this criterion. Make out your amplest catalogue of all the
    human faculties, as reason or the moral law, the will, the
    feeling of the coincidence of the two (a feeling _sui generis
    et demonstratio demonstrationum_) called the conscience,
    the understanding or prudence, wit, fancy, imagination,
    judgment,—and then of the objects on which these are to be
    employed, as the beauties, the terrors, and the seeming
    caprices of nature, the realities and the capabilities, that
    is, the actual and the ideal, of the human mind, conceived
    as an individual or as a social being, as in innocence or in
    guilt, in a play-paradise, or in a war-field of temptation;
    and then compare with Shakespeare under each of these heads
    all or any of the writers in prose and verse that have ever
    lived! Who, that is competent to judge, doubts the result? And
    ask your own hearts,—ask your own common-sense—to conceive the
    possibility of this man being—I say not, the drunken savage
    of that wretched sciolist, whom Frenchmen, to their shame,
    have honoured before their elder and better worthies,—but
    the anomalous, the wild, the irregular, genius of our daily
    criticism! What! are we to have miracles in sport? Or, I speak
    reverently, does God choose idiots by whom to convey divine
    truths to man?

    For a passage on Shakespeare as a “philosophical aristocrat”
    who “never promulgates any party tenets,” see “Notes on the
    _Tempest_.”


FRANCIS LORD JEFFREY, 1817

(1773-1850)

More full of wisdom and ridicule and sagacity, than all the moralists
and satirists that ever existed—he [Shakespeare] is more wild, airy and
inventive, and more pathetic and fantastic, than all the poets of all
regions and ages of the world:—and has all those elements so happily
mixed up in him, and bears his high faculties so temperately, that
the most severe reader cannot complain of him for want of strength or
of reason—nor the most sensitive for defect of ornament or ingenuity.
Every thing in him is in unmeasured abundance, and unequalled
perfection—but everything so balanced and kept in subordination, as not
to jostle or disturb or take the place of another. The most exquisite
poetical conceptions, images, and descriptions are given with such
brevity, and introduced with such skill, as merely to adorn, without
loading the sense they accompany. Although his sails are purple and
perfumed, and his prow of beaten gold, they waft him on his voyage,
not less, but more rapidly and directly than if they had been composed
of baser materials. All his excellences, like those of Nature herself,
are thrown out together; and instead of interfering with, support and
recommend each other. His flowers are not tied up in garlands, nor his
fruits crushed into baskets—but spring living from the soil, in all the
dew and freshness of youth; while the graceful foliage in which they
lurk, and the ample branches, the rough and vigorous stem, and the
wide-spreading roots on which they depend, are present along with them,
and share, in their places, the equal care of their Creator.

                    _The Edinburgh Review_, August 1817. Art. IX.
                        “Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays, by
                        William Hazlitt.” Vol. xxviii. p. 474.


WILLIAM HAZLITT, 1818

(1778-1830)

The striking peculiarity of Shakespeare’s mind was its generic quality,
its power of communication with all other minds—so that it contained a
universe of thought and feeling within itself, and had no one peculiar
bias, or exclusive excellence more than another. He was just like any
other man, but that he was like all other men. He was the least of an
egotist that it was possible to be. He was nothing in himself; but
he was all that others were, or that they could become. He not only
had in himself the germs of every faculty and feeling, but he could
follow them by anticipation, intuitively, into all their conceivable
ramifications, through every change of fortune or conflict of passion,
or turn of thought. He had “a mind reflecting ages past,” and
present:—All the people that ever lived are there. There was no respect
of persons with him. His genius alone shone equally on the evil and on
the good, on the wise and the foolish, the monarch and the beggar: “All
corners of the earth, kings, queens, and states, maids, matrons, nay,
the secrets of the grave,” are hardly hid from his searching glance.
He was like the genius of humanity, changing places with all of us at
pleasure, and playing with our purposes as with his own. He turned the
globe round for his amusement, and surveyed the generations of men,
and the individuals as they passed, with their different concerns,
passions, follies, vices, virtues, actions, and motives—as well those
that they knew, as those which they did not know, or acknowledge to
themselves. The dreams of childhood, the ravings of despair, were the
toys of his fancy. Airy beings waited at his call, and came at his
bidding. Harmless fairies nodded to him, and did him curtesies: and the
night-hag bestrode the blast at the command of “his so potent art.”
The world of spirits lay open to him, like the world of real men and
women: and there is the same truth in his delineations of the one as
of the other; for if the preternatural characters he describes could
be supposed to exist, they would speak, and feel, and act, as he makes
them. He had only to think of any thing in order to become that thing,
with all the circumstances belonging to it. When he conceived of a
character, whether real or imaginary, he not only entered into all its
thoughts and feelings, but seemed instantly, and as if by touching a
secret spring, to be surrounded with all the same objects, “subject to
the same skyey influences,” the same local, outward, and unforeseen
accidents which would occur in reality.

                    “On Shakespeare and Milton,” _Lectures on The
                        English Poets_. 1818, pp. 91-3.

    For a comment on this passage by William Minto, see p. 189.

           *       *       *       *       *

    The following occurs in Hazlitt’s essay “On Dryden and Pope”
    (_ib._, pp. 137-38):—The poet of nature is one who, from
    the elements of beauty, of power, and of passion in his own
    breast, sympathises with whatever is beautiful, and grand, and
    impassioned in nature, in its simple majesty, in its immediate
    appeal to the senses, to the thoughts and hearts of all men; so
    that the poet of nature, by the truth, and depth, and harmony
    of his mind, may be said to hold communion with the very soul
    of nature; to be identified with and to foreknow and to record
    the feelings of all men at all times and places, as they are
    liable to the same impressions; and to exert the same power
    over the minds of his readers, that nature does. He sees things
    in their eternal beauty, for he sees them as they are; he feels
    them in their universal interest, for he feels them as they
    affect the first principles of his and our common nature. Such
    was Homer, such was Shakespeare, whose works will last as long
    as nature, because they are a copy of the indestructible forms
    and everlasting impulses of nature, welling out from the bosom
    as from a perennial spring, or stamped upon the senses by the
    hand of their maker. The power of the imagination in them, is
    the representative power of all nature. It has its centre in
    the human soul, and makes the circuit of the universe.

    See also _The Round Table_, 1817—“On Posthumous Fame—whether
    Shakespeare was influenced by a love of it.”


JOHN KEATS, _c._ 1818

(1795-1821)

The genius of Shakespeare was an innate universality—wherefore he
had the utmost achievement of human intellect prostrate beneath his
indolent and kingly gaze. He could do easily Man’s utmost. His plans
of tasks to come were not of this world—if what he purposed to do
hereafter would not in his own Idea “answer the aim,” how tremendous
must have been his Conception of Ultimates!

               _Note on Troilus and Cressida_, I. iii. Marginalia
                   from the Shakespeare Folio of 1808. (_Works_,
                   ed. H. Buxton Forman. 1901, iii. p. 254.)


_c._ 1818

“_Sonnet on sitting down to read KING LEAR once again._”

    O golden-tongued Romance, with serene lute!
      Fair-plumed Syren, Queen of far-away!
      Leave melodising on this wintry day,
    Shut up thine olden pages, and be mute:
    Adieu! for, once again, the fierce dispute
      Betwixt damnation and impassion’d clay
      Must I burn through; once more humbly assay
    The bitter-sweet of this Shakespearian fruit:
      Chief Poet! and ye clouds of Albion,
        Begetters of our deep eternal theme!
      When through the old oak Forest I am gone,
        Let me not wander in a barren dream,
    But, when I am consumed in the fire,
    Give me new Phœnix wings to fly at my desire.

             _Life, Letters, and Literary Remains of John Keats_,
                 edited by Richard Monckton Milnes. Vol. i. p.
                 96.


JOHN WILSON, 1819

(1785-1854)

Shakespeare is of no age. He speaks a language which thrills in our
blood in spite of the separation of two hundred years. His thoughts,
passions, feelings, strains of fancy, all are of this day, as they were
of his own—and his genius may be contemporary with the mind of every
generation for a thousand years to come. He, above all poets, looked
upon man, and lived for mankind. His genius, universal in intellect,
could find, in no more bounded circumference, its proper sphere. It
could not bear exclusion from any part of human existence. Whatever
in nature and life was given to man, was given in contemplation and
poetry to him also, and over the undimmed mirror of his mind passed
all the shadows of our mortal world. Look through his plays and tell
what form of existence, what quality of spirit, he is most skilful to
delineate. Which of all the manifold beings he has drawn, lives before
our thoughts, our eyes, in most unpictured reality? Is it Othello,
Shylock, Falstaff, Lear, the wife of Macbeth, Imogen, Hamlet, Ariel? In
none of the other great dramatists do we see anything like a perfected
art. In their works, everything, it is true, exists in some shape or
other, which can be required in a drama taking for its interest the
absolute interest of human life and nature; but, after all, may not
the very best of their works be looked on as sublime masses of chaotic
confusion, through which the elements of our moral being appear? It
was Shakespeare, the most unlearned of all our writers, who first
exhibited on the stage perfect models, perfect images of all human
characters, and all human events. We cannot conceive any skill that
could from his great characters remove any defect, or add to their
perfect composition. Except in him, we look in vain for the entire
fulness, the self-consistency, and self-completeness of perfect art.

                  “A few words on Shakespeare, May 1819.” _Essays
                      Critical and Imaginative._ 1866, vol. iii.
                      pp. 420-21.


CHARLES SPRAGUE, 1824

(1791-1875)

        Who now shall grace the glowing throne,
        Where, all unrivall’d, all alone,
    Bold Shakespeare sat, and look’d creation through,
    The minstrel monarch of the worlds he drew?

    That throne is cold—that lyre in death unstrung,
    On whose proud note delighted Wonder hung.
    Yet old Oblivion, as in wrath he sweeps,
    One spot shall spare—the grave where Shakespeare sleeps.
    Rulers and ruled in common gloom may lie,
    But Nature’s laureate bards shall never die.
    Art’s chisell’d boast and glory’s trophied shore
    Must live in numbers or can live no more.
    While sculptured Jove some nameless waste may claim,
    Still roars the Olympic car in Pindar’s fame:
    Troy’s doubtful walls, in ashes pass’d away,
    Yet frown on Greece in Homer’s deathless lay;
    Rome, slowly sinking in her crumbling fanes,
    Stands all immortal in her Maro’s strains;
    So, too, yon giant empress of the isles,
    On whose broad sway the sun for ever smiles,
    To Time’s unsparing rage one day must bend,
    And all her triumphs in her Shakespeare end!

        O thou! to whose creative power
        We dedicate the festal hour,
    While Grace and Goodness round the altar stand,
    Learning’s anointed train, and Beauty’s rose-lipp’d band—
    Realms yet unborn, in accents now unknown,
    Thy song shall learn, and bless it for their own.
    Deep in the west, as Independence roves,
    His banners planting round the land he loves,
    Where Nature sleeps in Eden’s infant grace,
    In Time’s full hour shall spring a glorious race:
    Thy name, thy verse, thy language shall they bear,
    And deck for thee the vaulted temple there.
        Our Roman-hearted fathers broke
        Thy parent empire’s galling yoke,
    But thou, harmonious monarch of the mind,
    Around their sons a gentler chain shall bind;
    Still o’er our land shall Albion’s sceptre wave,
    And what her mighty Lion lost, her mightier Swan shall save.

                   Prize Ode recited at the representation of the
                       Shakespeare Jubilee, Boston, February 13,
                       1824.


CHARLES LAMB, 1824

(1775-1834)

    In “sad civility” once Garrick sate
    To see a play, mangled in form and state;
    Plebeian Shakespeare must the words supply,—
    The actors all were fools—of Quality.
    The scenes—the dresses—were above rebuke;—
    Scarce a performer there below a Duke.
    He sate, and mused how in his Shakespeare’s mind
    The idea of old nobility enshrined
    Should thence a grace and a refinement have
    Which passed these living Nobles to conceive—
    Who with such apish, base gesticulation,
    Remnants of starts, and dregs of playhouse passion,
    So foul belied their great forefathers’ fashion!
    He saw—and true nobility confessed
    Less in the high-born blood, than lowly poet’s breast.

             “Epilogue to an amateur Performance of Richard II.,”
                 ll. 10-24. _Works of Charles and Mary Lamb._
                 Ed. E. V. Lucas, 1903-4. Vol. v. p. 128.


JULIUS CHARLES HARE, 1827

(1795-1855)

Shakespeare “glances from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven.”
All Nature ministers to him, as gladly as a mother to her child.
Whether he wishes her to tune her myriad-voiced organ to Romeo’s
love, or to Miranda’s innocence, or to Perdita’s simplicity, or
to Rosalind’s playfulness, or to the sports of the Fairies, or to
Timon’s misanthropy, or to Macbeth’s desolating ambition, or to Lear’s
heart-broken frenzy—he has only to ask, and she puts on every feeling
and every passion with which he desires to invest her.

       *       *       *       *       *

No poet comes near Shakespeare in the number of bosom lines,—of lines
that we may cherish in our bosoms, and that seem almost as if they
had grown there,—of lines that, like bosom friends, are ever at hand
to comfort, counsel, and gladden us, under all the vicissitudes of
life,—of lines that, according to Bacon’s expression, “come home to our
business and bosoms,” and open the door for us to look in, and see what
is nestling and brooding there.

                                        _Guesses at Truth._ 1827.


JAMES HOGG, 1831

(1770-1835)

“_To the Genius of Shakespeare._”

        Spirit all limitless,
        Where is thy dwelling-place?
    Spirit of him whose high name we revere,
        Come on thy seraph wings,
        Come from thy wanderings,
    And smile on thy votaries, who sigh for thee here!

        Come, O thou spark divine,
        Rise from thy hallowed shrine;
    Here in the windings of Forth thou shalt see
        Hearts true to nature’s call
        Spirits congenial,
    Proud of their country, yet bowing to thee.

        Here with rapt heart and tongue,
        While our fond minds were young,
    Oft thy bold numbers we poured in our mirth;
        Now in our hall for aye
        This shall be holiday,
    Bard of all Nature, to honour thy birth.

        Whether thou tremblest o’er
        Green grave of Elsinore,
    Stayest o’er the hill of Dunsinnan to hover,
        Bosworth, or Shrewsbury,
        Egypt or Philippi;
    Come from thy roamings the universe over.

        Whether thou journey’st far
        On by the morning star,
    Dream’st on the shadowy brows of the moon,
        Or linger’st in fairyland,
        ’Mid lovely elves to stand,
    Singing thy carols unearthly and boon;—

        Here thou art called upon,
        Come thou to Caledon!
    Come to the land of the ardent and free!
        The land of the love recess,
        Mountain and wilderness,
    This is the land, thou wild meteor, for thee!

        Oh, never since time had birth,
        Rose from the pregnant earth
    Gems such as late have in Scotia sprung;—
        Gems that in future day,
        When ages pass away,
    Like thee shall be honoured, like thee shall be sung!

        Then here, by the sounding sea,
        Forest, and greenwood tree,
    Here to solicit thee cease shall we never:
        Yes, thou effulgence bright,
        Here must thy flame relight,
    Or vanish from Nature for ever and ever!

                      _Songs._ By the Ettrick Shepherd. Now first
                          collected. 1831, p. 304.


CHARLES LAMB, 1833

(1775-1834)

I am jealous of the combination of the sister arts. Let them sparkle
apart. What injury (short of the theatres) did Boydell’s Shakespeare
Gallery do me with Shakespeare?—to have Opie’s Shakespeare, Northcote’s
Shakespeare, light-headed Fuseli’s Shakespeare, heavy-headed Romney’s
Shakespeare, wooden-headed West’s Shakespeare (though he did the
best in “Lear”), deaf-headed Reynolds’s Shakespeare, instead of my,
and everybody’s Shakespeare. To be tied down to an authentic face of
Juliet! To have Imogen’s portrait! To confine the illimitable!

                      Letter to Samuel Rogers, December 21, 1833.
                          _Works of Charles and Mary Lamb._ Ed.
                          E. V. Lucas, 1903-4. Vol. vii.


HARTLEY COLERIDGE, 1833

(1796-1849)

“_To Shakespeare._”

    The soul of man is larger than the sky,
        Deeper than ocean, or the abysmal dark
        Of the unfathom’d centre. Like that Ark,
    Which in its sacred hold uplifted high,
    O’er the drown’d hills, the human family,
        And stock reserved of every living kind,
        So in the compass of the single mind
    The seeds and pregnant forms in essence lie,
    That make all worlds. Great Poet, ’twas thy art
        To know thyself, and in thyself to be
        Whate’er love, hate, ambition, destiny,
    Or the firm, fatal purpose of the heart,
    Can make of Man. Yet thou wert still the same,
    Serene of thought, unhurt by thy own flame.

                             _Poems._ Sonnet XXVIII. 1833, p. 28.


THOMAS DE QUINCEY, 1838

(1785-1859)

In the great world of woman, as the interpreter of the shifting phases
and the lunar varieties of that mighty changeable planet, that lovely
satellite of man, Shakespeare stands not the first only, not the
original only, but is yet the sole authentic oracle of truth. Woman,
therefore, the beauty of the female mind, _this_ is one great field of
his power. The supernatural world, the world of apparitions, _that_
is another.... In all Christendom, who, let us ask, who, who but
Shakespeare has found the power for effectually working this mysterious
mode of being?

  .       .       .       .       .       .       .

A third fund of Shakespeare’s peculiar power lies in his teeming
fertility of fine thoughts and sentiments. From his works alone might
be gathered a golden bead-roll of thoughts, the deepest, subtilest,
most pathetic, and yet most catholic and universally intelligible; the
most characteristic, also, and appropriate to the particular person,
the situation, and the case, yet, at the same time, applicable to
the circumstances of every human being, under all the accidents of
life, and all vicissitudes of fortune. But this subject offers so
vast a field of observation, it being so eminently the prerogative of
Shakespeare to have thought more finely and more extensively than all
other poets combined, that we cannot wrong the dignity of such a theme
by doing more, in our narrow limits, than simply noticing it as one of
the emblazonries upon Shakespeare’s shield.

Fourthly, we shall indicate (and, as in the last case, _barely_
indicate, without attempting in so vast a field to offer any adequate
illustrations) one mode of Shakespeare’s dramatic excellence, which
hitherto has not attracted any special or separate notice. We allude
to the forms of life, and natural human passion, as apparent in the
structure of his dialogue. Among the many defects and infirmities
of the French and of the Italian drama, indeed, we may say of the
Greek, the dialogue proceeds always by independent speeches, replying
indeed to each other, but never modified in its several terminal forms
immediately preceding. Now, in Shakespeare, who first set an example
of that most important innovation, in all his impassioned dialogues,
each reply or rejoinder seems the mere rebound of the previous speech.
Every form of natural interruption, breaking through the restraints
of ceremony under the impulses of tempestuous passion; every form
of hasty interrogative, ardent reiteration when a question has been
evaded; every form of scornful repetition of the hostile words; every
impatient continuation of the hostile statement; in short, all modes
and formulæ by which anger, hurry, fretfulness, scorn, impatience,
or excitement under any movement whatever, can disturb or modify or
dislocate the formal bookish style of commencement,—these are as rife
in Shakespeare’s dialogue as in life itself; and how much vivacity,
how profound a verisimilitude, they add to the scenic effect as an
imitation of human passion and real life, we need not say. A volume
might be written, illustrating the vast varieties of Shakespeare’s art
and power in this one field of improvement; another volume might be
dedicated to the exposure of the lifeless and unnatural result from the
opposite practice in the foreign stages of France and Italy. And we may
truly say, that were Shakespeare distinguished from them by this single
feature of nature and propriety, he would on that account alone have
merited a great immortality.

                    _Encyclopædia Britannica._ 7th edition, 1838.
                        Article on Shakespeare.

    The following fine apostrophe to Shakespeare occurs at the
    end of De Quincey’s essay “On the knocking at the gate in
    _Macbeth_”:—O, mighty poet! Thy works are not as those of other
    men, simply and merely great works of art; but are also like
    the phenomena of nature, like the sun and the sea, the stars
    and the flowers,—like frost and snow, rain and dew, hailstorm
    and thunder, which are to be studied with entire submission of
    our own faculties, and in the perfect faith that in them there
    can be no too much or too little, nothing useless or inert,—but
    that, the further we press in our discoveries, the more we
    shall see proofs of design and self-supporting arrangement
    where the careless eye had seen nothing but accident.


JOHN STERLING, 1839

(1806-1844)

“_Shakespeare._”

    How little fades from earth when sink to rest
    The hours and cares that moved a great man’s breast!
    Though nought of all we saw the grave may spare,
    His life pervades the world’s impregnate air;
    Though Shakespeare’s dust beneath our footsteps lies,
    His spirit breathes amid his native skies;
    With meaning won from him for ever glows
    Each air that England feels, and star it knows;
    His whispered words from many a mother’s voice
    Can make her sleeping child in dreams rejoice,
    And gleams from spheres he first conjoined to earth
    Are blent with rays of each new morning’s birth.
    Amid the sights and tales of common things,
    Leaf, flower, and bird, and wars, and deaths of kings,
    Of shore, and sea, and nature’s daily round,
    Of life that tills, and tombs that load the ground,
    His visions mingle, swell, command, pace by,
    And haunt with living presence heart and eye;
    And tones from him by other bosoms caught
    Awaken flush and stir of mounting thought,
    And the long sigh, and deep impassioned thrill,
    Rouse custom’s trance, and spur the faltering will.
    Above the goodly land more his than ours
    He sits supreme enthroned in skyey towers,
    And sees the heroic brood of his creation
    Teach larger life to his ennobled nation.
    O! shaping brain! O! flashing fancy’s hues!
    O! boundless heart kept fresh by pity’s dews!
    O! wit humane and blythe! O! sense sublime
    For each dim oracle of mantled Time!
    Transcendent Form of Man! in whom we read
    Mankind’s whole tale of impulse, thought, and deed;
    Amid the expanse of years beholding thee,
    We know how vast our world of life may be;
    Wherein, perchance, with aims as pure as thine,
    Small tasks and strengths may be no less divine.

                                           _Poems._ 1839, p. 151.


HENRY HALLAM, 1839

(1777-1859)

Of William Shakespeare, whom, through the mouths of those whom he has
inspired to body forth the modifications of his immense mind, we seem
to know better than any human writer, it may be truly said that we
scarcely know anything. We see him, so far as we do see him, not in
himself, but in a reflex image from the objectivity in which he was
manifested: he is Falstaff, and Mercutio, and Malvolio, and Jaques, and
Portia, and Imogen, and Lear, and Othello; but to us he is scarcely
a determined person, a substantial reality of past time, the man
Shakespeare. The two greatest names in poetry are to us little more
than names. If we are not yet come to question his unity, as we do that
of “the blind old man of Scios’ rocky isle,” an improvement in critical
acuteness doubtless reserved for a distant posterity, we as little feel
the power of identifying the young man who came up from Stratford, was
afterwards an indifferent player in a London theatre, and retired to
his native place in middle life, with the author of Macbeth and Lear,
as we can give a distinct historic personality to Homer. All that
insatiable curiosity and unwearied diligence have hitherto detected
about Shakespeare serves rather to disappoint and perplex us than to
furnish the slightest illustration of his character.

                 _Introduction to the Literature of Europe in the
                     Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Seventeenth
                     Centuries._ 1839, ii. 382-3.


—— JOHNSTONE, 1840

Some men can only acquire knowledge by a careful process of painstaking
investigation, while the minds of others descend at once, and with a
swoop, as it were, upon the truth of which they are in search. Others,
again, can not only do this, but having grasped the truth, they soar
upward with it to the highest pinnacles of imaginative loftiness, or
beyond these even, to the empyrean of thought, where the minds of
ordinarily gifted men may not follow them. Of this last class was
Shakespeare, the most wonderful of mere men that we know to have ever
lived.

                _The Table Talker, or Brief Essays on Society and
                    Literature._ 1840, vol. i. p. 183.


THOMAS CARLYLE, 1840

(1795-1881)

“_The Hero as Poet._”

It is in what I called Portrait-painting, delineating of men and
things, especially of men, that Shakespeare is great. All the greatness
of the man comes out decisively here. It is unexampled, I think, that
calm creative perspicacity of Shakespeare. The thing he looks at
reveals not this or that face of it, but its inmost heart and generic
secret: it dissolves itself as in light before him, so that he discerns
the perfect structure of it. Creative, we said; poetic creation, what
is this too but _seeing_ the thing sufficiently? The _word_ that will
describe the thing, follows of itself from such clear intense sight of
the thing. And is not Shakespeare’s _morality_, his valour, candour,
tolerance, truthfulness; his whole victorious strength and greatness,
which can triumph over such obstructions, visible there too? Great
as the world! No _twisted_, poor convex-concave mirror, reflecting
all objects with its own convexities and concavities; a perfectly
_level_ mirror;—that is to say withal, if we will understand it, a man
justly related to all things and men, a good man. It is truly a lordly
spectacle how this great soul takes in all kinds of men and objects, a
Falstaff, an Othello, a Juliet, a Coriolanus; sets them all forth to us
in their round completeness; loving, just, the equal brother of all.
_Novum Organum_, and all the intellect you will find in Bacon, is of a
quite secondary order; earthly, material, poor in comparison with this.
Among modern men, one finds, in strictness, almost nothing of the same
rank. Goethe alone, since the days of Shakespeare, reminds me of it. Of
him too you say that he _saw_ the object; you may say what he himself
says of Shakespeare: “His characters are like watches with dial-plates
of transparent crystal; they show you the hour like others, and the
inward mechanism also is all visible.”

            _On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History._
                Ed. H. D. Traill. 1898, pp. 104-5.

    In Carlyle’s essay on “Corn Law Rhymes” (_Edinburgh Review_,
    July, 1832, p. 342) occurs the following:—Foolish Pedant,
    that sittest there compassionately descanting on the Learning
    of Shakespeare! Shakespeare had penetrated into innumerable
    things; far into Nature with her divine Splendours and infernal
    Terrors, her Ariel Melodies, and mystic mandragora Moans; far
    into man’s workings with Nature, into man’s Art and Artifice;
    Shakespeare knew (_Kenned_, which in those days still partially
    meant _Can-ned_) innumerable things; what men are, and what
    the world is, and how and what men aim at there, from the Dame
    Quickly of modern Eastcheap to the Cæsar of ancient Rome, over
    many countries, over many centuries: of all this he had the
    clearest understanding and constructive comprehension; all this
    was his Learning and Insight.


WILLIAM WORDSWORTH, 1841

(1770-1850)

“_Shakespeare and Goethe._”

He (Goethe) does not seem to me to be a great poet in either of the
classes of poets. At the head of the first class I would place Homer
and Shakespeare, whose universal minds are able to reach every variety
of thought and feeling without bringing their own individuality before
the reader. They infuse, they breathe life into every object they
approach, but you never find _themselves_. At the head of the second
class, those whom you can trace individually in all they write, I would
place Spenser and Milton. In all that Spenser writes you can trace
the gentle affectionate spirit of the man; in all that Milton writes
you find the exalted sustained being that he was. Now, in what Goethe
writes, who aims to be of the first class, the _universal_, you find
the man himself, the artificial man where he should not be found; so
that I consider him a very artificial writer, aiming to be universal,
and yet constantly exposing his individuality, which his character
was not of a kind to dignify. He had not sufficiently clear moral
perceptions to make him anything but an artificial writer.

                  _Memoirs of William Wordsworth_, by Christopher
                      Wordsworth. 1851, vol. ii. pp. 437-8.

    The value of this estimate of Goethe is somewhat discounted
    by a remark made at another time by Wordsworth: “I have tried
    to read Goethe. I never could succeed.... I am not intimately
    acquainted with them [his poems] generally.” _Memoirs_, ii. p.
    478.


THOMAS BABINGTON, LORD MACAULAY, 1843

(1800-1859)

Highest among those who have exhibited human nature by means of
dialogue stands Shakespeare. His variety is like the variety of
nature, endless diversity, scarcely any monstrosity. The characters
of which he has given us an impression, as vivid as that which we
receive from the characters of our own associates, are to be reckoned
by scores. Yet in all these scores hardly one character is to be found
which deviates widely from the common standard, and which we should
call very eccentric if we met it in real life. The silly notion that
every man has one ruling passion, and that this clue, once known,
unravels all the mysteries of his conduct, finds no countenance in
the plays of Shakespeare. There man appears as he is, made up of a
crowd of passions, which contend for the mastery over him, and govern
him in turn. What is Hamlet’s ruling passion? Or Othello’s? Or Harry
the Fifth’s? Or Wolsey’s? Or Lear’s? Or Shylock’s? Or Benedick’s? Or
Macbeth’s? Or that of Cassius? Or that of Falconbridge? But we might
go on for ever. Take a single example, Shylock. Is he so eager for
money as to be indifferent to revenge? Or so eager for revenge as to be
indifferent to money? Or so bent on both together as to be indifferent
to the honour of his nation and the law of Moses? All his propensities
are mingled with each other, so that, in trying to apportion to each
its proper part, we find the same difficulty which constantly meets us
in real life. A superficial critic may say, that hatred is Shylock’s
ruling passion. But how many passions have amalgamated to form that
hatred? It is partly the result of wounded pride: Antonio has called
him dog. It is partly the result of covetousness: Antonio has hindered
him of half a million; and, when Antonio is gone, there will be no
limit to the gains of usury. It is partly the result of national and
religious feeling: Antonio has spit on the Jewish gabardine; and the
oath of revenge has been sworn by the Jewish Sabbath. We might go
through all the characters which we have mentioned, and through fifty
more in the same way; for it is the constant manner of Shakespeare to
represent the human mind as lying, not under the absolute dominion
of one despotic propensity, but under a mixed government, in which a
hundred powers balance each other. Admirable as he is in all parts
of his art, we most admire him for this, that while he has left us a
greater number of striking portraits than all other dramatists put
together, he has scarcely left us a single caricature.

                 Essay on “Diary and Letters of Madame D’Arblay,”
                     _Edinburgh Review_, Jan. 1843. Art. IX. vol.
                     lxxvi. pp. 560-1.


RALPH WALDO EMERSON, 1844

(1803-1882)

Shakespeare is the only biographer of Shakespeare; and even he can
tell nothing except to the Shakespeare in us; that is, to our most
apprehensive and sympathetic hour. He cannot step from off his tripod,
and give us anecdotes of his inspirations. Read the antique documents
extricated, analysed, and compared, by the assiduous Dyce and Collier;
and now read one of those skiey sentences—aerolites,—which seem to
have fallen out of heaven, and which, not your experience, but the man
within the breast, has accepted as words of fate; and tell me if they
match, if the former account in any manner for the latter: or, which
gives the most historical insight into the man.

Hence, though our external history is so meagre, yet, with Shakespeare
for biographer, instead of Aubrey and Rowe, we have really the
information which is material, that which describes character and
fortune, that which, if we were about to meet the man and deal with
him, would most import us to know. We have his recorded convictions
on those questions which knock for answer at every heart,—on life and
death, on love, on wealth and poverty, on the prizes of life, and
the ways whereby we come at them; on the characters of men, and the
influences, occult and open, which affect their fortunes; and on those
mysterious and demoniacal powers which defy our science, and which yet
interweave their malice and their gift in our brightest hours. Whoever
read the volume of the Sonnets, without finding that the poet had
there revealed, under masks that are no masks to the intelligent, the
lore of friendship and of love; the confusion of sentiments in the most
susceptible, and, at the same time, the most intellectual of men? What
trait of his private mind has he hidden in his dramas? One can discern,
in his ample pictures of the gentleman and the king, that forms and
humanities pleased him; his delight in troops of friends, in large
hospitality, in cheerful giving. Let Timon, let Warwick, let Antonio
the merchant, answer for his great heart. So far from Shakespeare’s
being the least known, he is the one person, in all modern history,
known to us. What point of morals, of manners, of economy, of
philosophy, of religion, of taste, of the conduct of life, has he not
settled? What mystery has he not signified his knowledge of? What
office, or function, or district of man’s work, has he not remembered?
What king has he not taught State, as Talma taught Napoleon? What
maiden has not found him finer than her delicacy? What lover has he
not outloved? What sage has he not outseen? What gentleman has he not
instructed in the rudeness of his behaviour?

                     “Shakespeare; or, the Poet.” _Representative
                         Men._ 1844, p. 154.


FREDERICK WILLIAM ROBERTSON, 1850

(1816-1853)

What I admire in Shakspeare, however, is that his loves are all
human—no earthliness hiding itself from itself in sentimental
transcendentalism—no loves of the angels, which are the least angelic
things, I believe, that float in the clouds, though they do look down
upon mortal feelings with contempt, just as the dark volumes of smoke
which issue from the long chimney of a manufactory might brood very
sublimely over the town which they blacken, and fancy themselves far
more ethereal than those vapours which steam up from the earth by day
and night. Yet these are pure water, and those are destined to condense
in black soot. So are the transcendentalisms of affection. Shakspeare
is healthy, true to Humanity in this: and for that reason I pardon him
even his earthly coarseness. You always know that you are on an earth
which has to be refined, instead of floating in the empyrean with wings
of wax. Therein he is immeasurably greater than Shelley. Shelleyism is
very sublime, sublimer a good deal than God, for God’s world is all
wrong and Shelley is all right—much purer than Christ, for Shelley can
criticise Christ’s heart and life—nevertheless, Shelleyism is only
atmospheric profligacy, to coin a Montgomeryism. I believe this to
be one of Shakespeare’s most wondrous qualities—the humanity of his
nature and heart. There is a spirit of sunny endeavour about him, and
an acquiescence in things as they are—not incompatible with a cheerful
resolve to make them better.

               _Life and Letters of Frederick W. Robertson, M.A._
                   Edited by Stopford A. Brooke, M.A. 1886,
                   vol. i. p. 289, Letter LX.


LEIGH HUNT, 1851

(1784-1859)

“_Associations with Shakespeare._”

How naturally the idea of Shakespeare can be made to associate itself
with anything which is worth mention! Take Christmas for instance:
“Shakespeare and Christmas”; the two ideas fall as happily together
as “wine and walnuts,” or heart and soul. So you may put together
“Shakespeare and May,” or “Shakespeare and June,” and twenty passages
start into your memory about spring and violets. Or you may say
“Shakespeare and Love,” and you are in the midst of a bevy of bright
damsels, as sweet as rosebuds; or “Shakespeare and Death,” and all
graves, and thoughts of graves, are before you; or “Shakespeare and
Life,” and you have the whole world of youth, and spirit, and Hotspur,
and life itself; or you may say even, “Shakespeare and Hate,” and he
will say all that can be said for hate, as well as against it, till you
shall take Shylock himself into your Christian arms, and tears shall
make you of one faith.

                                      _Table Talk._ 1851, p. 154.


JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE, 1852

(1818-1894)

We wonder at the grandeur, the moral majesty of some of Shakespeare’s
characters, so far beyond what the noblest among ourselves can imitate,
and at first thought we attribute it to the genius of the poet, who
has outstripped nature in his creations. But we are misunderstanding
the power and the meaning of poetry in attributing creativeness to
it in any such sense. Shakespeare created, but only as the spirit of
nature created around him, working in him as it worked abroad in those
among whom he lived. The men whom he draws were such men as he saw
and knew; the words they utter were such as he heard in the ordinary
conversations in which he joined. At the Mermaid with Raleigh and
with Sidney, and at a thousand unnamed English firesides, he found
the living originals for his Prince Hals, his Orlandos, his Antonios,
his Portias, his Isabellas. The closer personal acquaintance which we
can form with the English of the age of Elizabeth, the more we are
satisfied that Shakespeare’s great poetry is no more than the rhythmic
echo of the life which it depicts.

                 _Short Studies on Great Subjects._ First Series.
                     “England’s Forgotten Worthies.” 1878, i.
                     445-6, reprinted from _Westminster Review_.
                     1852.


DAVID MASSON, 1853

(_b._ 1822)

Shakespeare is as astonishing for the exuberance of his genius in
abstract notions, and for the depth of his analytic and philosophic
insight, as for the scope and minuteness of his poetic imagination.
It is as if into a mind poetical in _form_ there had been poured all
the _matter_ that existed in the mind of his contemporary Bacon. In
Shakespeare’s plays we have thought, history, exposition, philosophy,
all within the round of the poet. The only difference between him and
Bacon sometimes is that Bacon writes an essay and calls it his own,
while Shakespeare writes a similar essay and puts it into the mouth of
a Ulysses or a Polonius.

            _Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and Other Essays._ 1874.
                Essay V. p. 242, reprinted from _North British
                Review_. 1853.


MATTHEW ARNOLD, 1853

(1822-1888)

“_Shakespeare._”

    Others abide our question. Thou art free.
      We ask and ask—Thou smilest and art still,
      Out-topping knowledge. For the loftiest hill,
    Who to the stars uncrowns his majesty,
    Planting his steadfast footsteps in the sea,
      Making the heaven of heavens his dwelling-place,
      Spares but the cloudy border of his base
    To the foil’d searching of mortality;

    And thou, who didst the stars and sunbeams know,
      Self-school’d, self-scann’d, self-honour’d, self-secure,
    Didst tread on earth unguessed at.—Better so!
      All pains the immortal spirit must endure,
    All weakness which impairs, all griefs which bow,
    Find their sole speech in that victorious brow.

                                                   _Poems._ 1853.


WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, 1853

(1775-1864)

“_Shakespeare and Milton._”

    The tongue of England, that which myriads
    Have spoken and will speak, were paralysed
    Hereafter, but two mighty men stand forth
    Above the flight of ages, two alone;
    One crying out,
                    _All nations spoke thro’ me_.

    The other:
               True; and thro’ this trumpet burst
    God’s word; the fall of Angels, and the doom
    First of immortal, then of mortal, Man,
    Glory! be glory! not to me, to God.

                      _The Lost Fruit off an old Tree._ No. LVII.


JOHN HENRY NEWMAN, 1858

(1801-1890)

A great author, gentlemen, is not one who merely has a _copia
verborum_, whether in prose or verse, and can, as it were, turn on at
his will any number of splendid phrases and swelling sentences; but he
is one who has something to say and knows how to say it. I do not claim
for him, as such, any great depth of thought, or breadth of view, or
philosophy, or sagacity, or knowledge of human nature, or experience
of human life, though these additional gifts he may have, and the
more he has of them the greater he is; but I ascribe to him, as his
characteristic gift, in a large sense the faculty of Expression. He
is master of the twofold Logos, the thought and the word, distinct,
but inseparable from each other. He may, if so be, elaborate his
compositions, or he may pour out his improvisations, but in either
case he has but one aim, which he keeps steadily before him, and is
conscientious and single-minded in fulfilling. That aim is to give
forth what he has within him; and from his very earnestness it comes to
pass that, whatever be the splendour of his diction or the harmony of
his periods, he has with him the charm of an incommunicable simplicity.
Whatever be his subject, high or low, he treats it suitably and for its
own sake. If he is a poet, “nil molitur _inepte_.” If he is an orator,
then too he speaks, not only “distincte” and “splendide,” but also
“apte.” His page is the lucid mirror of his mind and life:

            “Quo fit, ut omnis
    Votivâ pateat veluti descripta labellâ
    Vita senis.”

He writes passionately, because he feels keenly; forcibly, because
he conceives vividly; he sees too clearly to be vague; he is too
serious to be otiose; he can analyse his subject, and therefore he is
rich; he embraces it as a whole and in its parts, and therefore he is
consistent; he has a firm hold of it, and therefore he is luminous;
when his imagination wells up, it overflows its ornament; when his
heart is touched, it thrills along his verse. He always has the right
word for the right idea, and never a word too much. If he is brief, it
is because few words suffice; when he is lavish of them, still each
word has its mark, and aids, not embarrasses, the vigorous march of
his elocution. He expresses what all feel, but all cannot say; and his
sayings pass into proverbs among his people, and his phrases become
household words and idioms of their daily speech, which is tessellated
with the rich fragments of his language, as we see in foreign lands the
marbles of Roman grandeur worked into the walls and pavements of modern
palaces.

Such pre-eminently is Shakespeare among ourselves; such pre-eminently
is Virgil among the Latins; such in their degree are all those writers
who in every nation go by the name of Classics.

              “The Idea of a University defined and illustrated.”
                  _Literature_, ix. 1873, pp. 291-3.


JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL, _c._ 1858

(1819-1891)

Only Shakespeare was endowed with that healthy equilibrium of nature
whose point of rest was midway between the imagination and the
understanding,—that perfectly unruffled brain which reflected all
objects with almost inhuman impartiality,—that outlook whose range was
ecliptical, dominating all zones of human thought and action,—that
power of verisimilar conception which could take away Richard
III. from History, and Ulysses from Homer,—and that creative
faculty whose equal touch is alike vivifying in Shallow and in Lear.
He alone never seeks in abnormal and monstrous characters to evade the
risks and responsibilities of absolute truthfulness, nor to stimulate a
jaded imagination by Caligulan horrors of plot. He is never, like many
of his fellow-dramatists, confronted with unnatural Frankensteins of
his own making, whom he must get off his hands as best he may. Given
a human foible, he can incarnate it in the nothingness of Slender, or
make it loom gigantic through the tragic twilight of Hamlet. We are
tired of the vagueness which classes all the Elizabethan playwrights
together as “great dramatists,”—as if Shakespeare did not differ from
them in kind as well as in degree. Fine poets some of them were; but
though imagination and the power of poetic expression are, singly, not
uncommon gifts, and even in combination not without secular examples,
yet it is the rarest of earthly phenomena to find them joined with
those faculties of perception, arrangement, and plastic instinct in
the loving union which alone makes a great dramatic poet possible.
We suspect that Shakespeare will long continue the only specimen of
the genus. His contemporaries, in their comedies, either force what
they call “a humour” till it becomes fantastical, or hunt for jokes,
like rat-catchers, in the sewers of human nature and of language.
In their tragedies they become heavy without grandeur, like Jonson,
or mistake the stilts for the cothurnus, as Chapman and Webster too
often do. Every new edition of an Elizabethan dramatist is but the
putting of another witness into the box to prove the inaccessibility of
Shakespeare’s standpoint as poet and artist.

                               _Library of Old Authors._ 1858-64.

    For an interesting note on Shakespeare’s “artistic discretion”
    and the “impersonality” of his writings, see “Shakespeare once
    more” (_Among My Books._ 1870, pp. 226-7).


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE, 1863

(1804-1864)

Shakespeare has surface beneath surface, to an immeasurable depth,
adapted to the plummet-line of every reader; his works present many
phases of truth, each with scope large enough to fill a contemplative
mind. Whatever you seek in him you will surely discover, provided
you seek truth. There is no exhausting the various interpretation of
his symbols; and a thousand years hence, a world of new readers will
possess a whole library of new books, as we ourselves do, in these
volumes old already.

                                    _Our Old Home._ 1863, i. 171.

    In _Our Old Home_ (i. 158-60) Hawthorne records his impressions
    on visiting Shakespeare’s house.


BISHOP CHARLES WORDSWORTH, 1864

(1806-1892)

Take the entire range of English literature; put together our best
authors, who have written upon subjects not professedly religious or
theological, and we shall not find, I believe, in them _all united_,
so much evidence of the Bible having been read and used, as we have
found in Shakespeare _alone_. This is a phenomenon which admits of
being looked at from several points of view; but I shall be content to
regard it solely in connection with the undoubted fact, that of all our
authors, Shakespeare is also, by general confession, the greatest and
the best. According to the testimony of Charles Lamb, a most competent
judge in regard to all the literary elements of the question, our poet,
“in his divine mind and manners, surpassed not only the great men his
contemporaries, but all mankind.” And, looking at this superiority from
my own point of view, I cannot but remark that, while most of the great
laymen of that great Elizabethan age—Lord Bacon, Sir Walter Raleigh,
the poet Spenser, Sir Philip Sidney, Lord Burleigh, Ben Jonson—have
paid homage to Christianity, if not always in their practice, yet in
the conviction of their understanding, none of them has done this so
fully or so effectively as Shakespeare.

                      “_On Shakespeare’s Knowledge and Use of the
                          Bible._” 1864, pp. 291-2.


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, 1864

(1809-1894)

    O land of Shakespeare! ours with all thy past,
      Till these last years that make the sea so wide,
    Think not the jar of battle’s trumpet-blast
      Has dulled our aching sense to joyous pride
    In every noble word thy sons bequeathed
      The air our fathers breathed!

    War-wasted, haggard, panting from the strife,
      We turn to other days and far-off lands,
    Live o’er in dreams the Poet’s faded life,
      Come with fresh lilies in our fevered hands
    To wreathe his bust, and scatter purple flowers,—
      Not his the need, but ours!

    We call those poets who are first to mark
      Through earth’s dull mist the coming of the dawn,—
    Who see in twilight’s gloom the first pale spark,
      While others only note that day is gone;
    For him the Lord of light the curtain rent
      That veils the firmament . . .

    With no vain praise we mock the stone-carved name
      Stamped once on dust that moved with pulsed breath,
    As thinking to enlarge that amplest fame
      Whose undimmed glories gild the night of death:
    We praise not star or sun; in these we see
      Thee, Father, only Thee!

    Thy gifts are beauty, wisdom, power, and love:
      We read, we reverence on this human soul,—
    Earth’s clearest mirror of the light above,—
      Plain as the record on Thy prophet’s scroll,
    When o’er his page the effluent splendours poured,
      Thine own, “Thus saith the Lord!”

    This player was a prophet from on high,
      Thine own elected. Statesman, poet, sage,
    For him Thy sovereign pleasure passed them by;
      Sidney’s fair youth, and Raleigh’s ripened age,
    Spenser’s chaste soul, and his imperial mind
      Who taught and shamed mankind.

                 “Shakespeare Tercentennial Celebration, 23 April
                     1864.” _Songs of Many Seasons._ 1875.


CARDINAL WISEMAN, 1865

(1802-1865)

We may compare the mind of Shakespeare to a diamond, pellucid, bright,
and untinted, cut into countless polished facets, which, in constant
movement, at every smallest change of direction or of angle, caught a
new reflection, so that not one of its brilliant mirrors could be for a
moment idle, but by a power beyond its control was ever busy with the
reflection of innumerable images, either distinct or running into one
another, or repeated each so clearly as to allow him, when he chose, to
fix it in his memory.

                              _William Shakespeare._ 1865, p. 50.


ARCHBISHOP RICHARD CHENEVIX TRENCH, 1865

(1807-1886)

    A counsellor well fitted to advise
      In daily life, and at whose lips no less
      Men may inquire or nations, when distress
    Of sudden doubtful danger may arise,
    Who, though his head be hidden in the skies,
      Plants his firm foot upon our common earth,
      Dealing with thoughts which everywhere have birth,—
    This is the poet, true of heart and wise:
    No dweller in a baseless world of dream,
      Which is not earth nor heaven: his words have passed
        Into man’s common thought and week-day phrase;
      This is the poet and his verse will last.
    Such was our Shakespeare once, and such doth seem
        One who redeems our later gloomier days.

                _Poems collected and arranged anew._ 1865, p. 83.


FRANCIS TURNER PALGRAVE, 1865

(1824-1897)

Only three or four generations of fairly long-lived men lie between
us and Shakespeare; literature in his own time had reached a high
development; his grandeur and sweetness were freely recognised; within
seventy years of his death his biography was attempted; yet we know
little more of Shakespeare himself than we do of Homer. Like several of
the greatest men,—Lucretius, Virgil, Tacitus, Dante,—a mystery never
to be dispelled hangs over his life. He has entered into the cloud.
With a natural and an honourable diligence, other men have given their
lives to the investigation of his, and many external circumstances,
mostly of a minor order, have been thus collected: yet of “the man
Shakespeare,” in Mr. Hallam’s words, we know nothing. Something which
seems more than human in immensity of range and calmness of insight
moves before us in the Plays; but, from the nature of dramatic writing,
the author’s personality is inevitably veiled; no letter, no saying
of his, or description by an intimate friend, has been preserved: and
even when we turn to the _Sonnets_, though each is an autobiographical
confession, we find ourselves equally foiled. These revelations of
the poet’s innermost nature appear to teach us less of the man than
the tone of mind which we trace, or seem to trace, in _Measure for
Measure_, _Hamlet_, and the _Tempest_: the strange imagery of passion
which passes over the magic mirror has no tangible existence before or
behind it:—the great artist, like Nature herself, is still latent in
his works; diffused through his own creation.

  .       .       .       .       .       .

Yet there is, after all, nothing more remarkable or fascinating in
English poetry than these personal revelations of the mind of our
greatest poet. We read them again and again, and find each time some
new proof of his almost superhuman insight into human nature; of his
unrivalled mastery over all the tones of love.

               _Songs and Sonnets of William Shakespeare._ Edited
                   by Francis Turner Palgrave. 1865, pp. 238-9
                   and 243.


FRANCES ANNE KEMBLE, 1866

(1809-1893)

“_To Shakespeare._”

    Shelter and succour such as common men
      Afford the weaker partners of their fate,
      Have I derived from thee—from thee, most great
    And powerful genius! whose sublime control
    Still from thy grave governs each human soul,
    That reads the wondrous record of thy pen.
    From sordid sorrows thou hast set me free,
      And turned from want’s grim ways my tottering feet,
    And to sad empty hours, given royally,
      A labour, than all leisure far more sweet.
    The daily bread, for which we humbly pray,
      Thou gavest me as if I were a child,
      And still with converse noble, wise, and mild,
    Charmed with despair my sinking soul away;
    Shall I not bless the need, to which was given
    Of all the angels in the host of heaven,
    Thee, for my guardian, spirit strong and bland!
    Lord of the speech of my dear native land!

                                            _Poems._ 1866, p. 61.


JOHN RUSKIN, 1868

(1819-1900)

It does not matter how little, or how much, any of us have read,
either of Homer, or Shakespeare: everything round us, in substance,
or in thought, has been moulded by them. All Greek gentlemen were
educated under Homer. All Roman gentlemen by Greek literature. All
Italian, and French, and English gentlemen, by Roman literature, and
by its principles. Of the scope of Shakespeare, I will say only, that
the intellectual measure of every man since born, in the domains of
creative thought, may be assigned to him, according to the degree in
which he has been taught by Shakespeare.

                    _The Mystery of Life and its Arts._ Afternoon
                        Lectures on Literature and Art, delivered
                        at Royal College of Science, St.
                        Stephen’s Green, Dublin, 1867 and 1868.
                        1869, p. 109.


DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI, 1871

(1828-1882)

“_On the Site of a Mulberry-Tree._”

_Planted by William Shakespeare; felled by the Rev. F. Gastrell._

    This tree, here fall’n, no common birth or death
      Shared with its kind. The world’s enfranchised son,
      Who found the trees of Life and Knowledge one,
    Here set it, frailer than his laurel-wreath.
    Shall not the wretch whose hand it fell beneath
      Rank also singly—the supreme unhung?
      Lo! Sheppard, Turpin, pleading with black tongue,
    This viler thief’s unsuffocated breath!

    We’ll search thy glossary, Shakespeare! whence almost,
      And whence alone, some name shall be reveal’d
        For this deaf drudge, to whom no length of years
        Sufficed to catch the music of the spheres;
      Whose soul is carrion now,—too mean to yield
    Some Starveling’s ninth allotment of a ghost.

           _Academy_, 15 Feb. 1871.[185:1] _Collected Works._ Ed.
               W. M. Rossetti. 1886, vol. i. p. 285.


FOOTNOTES:

[185:1] The last line in the earlier version—that printed in the
_Academy_—has “tailor’s” for “Starveling’s.” Rossetti made the
alteration from fear of offending sensitive members of the tailoring
profession.


BAYARD TAYLOR, 1872

(1825-1878)

“_Shakespeare’s Statue, Central Park, New York, 23 May 1872._”

          Here, in his right, he stands!
    No breadth of earth-dividing seas can bar
    The breeze of morning, or the morning star,
          From visiting our lands:
    His wit the breeze, his wisdom as the star,
    Shone where our earliest life was set, and blew
          To freshen hope and plan
          In brains American,—
    To urge, resist, encourage, and subdue!
    He came, a household ghost we could not ban:
    He sat, on winter nights, by cabin fires;
    His summer fairies linked their hands
          Along our yellow sands;
    He preached within the shadow of our spires;
    And when the certain Fate drew nigh, to cleave
    The birth-cord, and a separate being leave,
    He, in our ranks of patient-hearted men,
    Wrought with the boundless forces of his fame,
          Victorious, and became
    The Master of our thought, the land’s first Citizen!
          If, here, his image seem
    Of softer scenes and grayer skies to dream,
    Thatched cot and rustic tavern, ivied hall,
          The cuckoo’s April call
    And cowslip-meads beside the Avon stream,
    He shall not fail that other home to find
          We could not leave behind!
    The forms of Passion, which his fancy drew,
      In us their ancient likenesses beget:
    So, from our lives for ever born anew,
      He stands amid his own creations yet!
    Here comes lean Cassius, of conventions tired;
      Here, in his coach, luxurious Antony
    Beside his Egypt, still of men admired;
      And Brutus plans some purer liberty!
    A thousand Shylocks, Jew and Christian, pass;
      A hundred Hamlets, by their times betrayed;
    And sweet Anne Page comes tripping o’er the grass,
      And awkward Falstaff pants beneath the shade.
    Here toss upon the wanton summer wind
          The locks of Rosalind;
    Here some gay glove the damned spot conceals
          Which Lady Macbeth feels:
    His ease here smiling smooth Iago takes,
      And outcast Lear gives passage to his woe,
    And here some foiled Reformer sadly breaks
          His wand of Prospero!
      In liveried splendour, side by side,
      Nick Bottom and Titania ride,
      And Portia, flushed with cheers of men,
      Disdains dear faithful Imogen;
      And Puck beside the form of Morse,
      Stops on his forty-minute course;
      And Ariel from his swinging bough
      A blossom casts on Bryant’s brow,
    Until, as summoned from his brooding brain,
      He sees his children all again,
    In us, as on our lips, each fresh, immortal strain!

                 _Poetical Works._ Stanzas II.-III. 1880, p. 224.


WILLIAM MINTO, 1874

(1845-1893)

It is a favourite way with some eulogists of Shakespeare to deny him
all individuality whatsoever. He was not one man, they say, but an
epitome of all men. His mind, says Hazlitt, “had no one peculiar bias
or exclusive excellence more than another. He was just like any other
man, but that he was like all other men. He was the least of an egotist
that it was possible to be. He was nothing in himself; but he was all
that others were or that they could become.” Against such a degradation
of Shakespeare’s character, or of any man’s character, it is our duty
to protest. On trying to make Shakespeare more than human, the reckless
panegyrist makes him considerably less than human: instead of the man
whose prudence made him rich, whose affectionate nature made him loved
almost to idolatry, and whose genius has been the wonder of the world,
we are presented with plasticity in the abstract, an object not more
interesting than a quarry of potter’s clay.

                   “William Shakespeare, his Life and Character.”
                       _Characteristics of English Poets._ 1874,
                       p. 350.

    See the passage from Hazlitt’s _Lectures on the English Poets_,
    p. 135.


EDWARD DOWDEN, 1875

(_b._ 1843)

There are certain problems which Shakespeare at once pronounces
insoluble. He does not, like Milton, propose to give any account of
the origin of evil. He does not, like Dante, pursue the soul of man
through circles of unending torture, or spheres made radiant by the
eternal presence of God. Satan, in Shakespeare’s poems, does not come
voyaging on gigantic vans across Chaos to find the earth. No great
deliverer of mankind descends from the heavens. Here, upon the earth,
evil _is_—such was Shakespeare’s declaration in the most emphatic
accent. Iago actually exists. There is also in the earth a sacred
passion of deliverance, a pure redeeming ardour. Cordelia exists. This
Shakespeare can tell for certain. But how Iago can be, and why Cordelia
lies strangled across the breast of Lear—are these questions which
you go on to ask? Something has been already said of the severity of
Shakespeare. It is a portion of his severity to decline all answers
to such questions as these. Is ignorance painful? Well, then, it is
painful. Little solutions of your large difficulties can readily be
obtained from priest or _philosopher_. Shakespeare prefers to let you
remain in the solemn presence of a mystery. He does not invite you into
his little church or his little library brilliantly illuminated by
philosophical or theological rushlights. You remain in the darkness.
But you remain in the vital air. And the great night is overhead.

               _Shakspere: A Critical Study of his Mind and Art._
                   1875, p. 226.


GEORGE MEREDITH, 1877

(_b._ 1828)

Shakespeare is a well-spring of characters which are saturated with the
comic spirit; with more of what we will call blood-life than is to be
found anywhere out of Shakespeare; and they are of this world, but they
are of the world enlarged to our embrace by imagination, and by great
poetic imagination. They are, as it were—I put it to suit my present
comparison—creatures of the woods and wilds, not in walled towns, not
grouped and toned to pursue a comic exhibition of the narrower world of
society. Jaques, Falstaff and his regiment, the varied troop of clowns,
Malvolio, Sir Hugh Evans and Fluellen—marvellous Welshmen!—Benedict
[_sic_] and Beatrice, Dogberry, and the rest, are subjects of a special
study in the poetically comic.

              _On the Idea of Comedy and of the Uses of the Comic
                  Spirit._ A lecture delivered at the London
                  Institution, 1 Feb. 1877. Published 1897.


FREDERICK JAMES FURNIVALL, 1877

(_b._ 1825)

Altogether “a manly man” (as Chaucer says) this Shakespeare, strong,
tender, humourful, sensitive, impressionable, the truest friend,
the foe of none but narrow minds and base. And as we track his work
from the lightness and fun of its rise, through the fairy fancy, the
youthful passion, the rich imaginings, the ardent patriotism, the
brilliant sunshine, of his first and second times, through the tender
affection of his Sonnets, the whirlwind of passions in his Tragedies,
and then to the lovely sunset of his latest plays, what can we do but
bless his name, and be thankful that he came to be a delight, a lift
and strength, to us and our children’s children to all time—a bond that
shall last for ever between all English-speaking, English-reading men,
the members of that great Teutonic brotherhood which shall yet long
lead the world in the fight for freedom and for truth!

                         Introduction to _The Leopold Shakspere_.
                             1877, p. cxvi.


WALTER HORATIO PATER, 1878

(1839-1894)

As happens with every true dramatist, Shakespeare is for the most
part hidden behind the persons of his creation. Yet there are certain
of his characters in which we feel that there is something of
self-portraiture. And it is not so much in his grander, more subtle and
ingenious creations that we feel this—in “Hamlet” and “King Lear”—as
in those slighter and more spontaneously developed figures, who, while
far from playing principal parts, are yet distinguished by a peculiar
happiness and delicate ease in the drawing of them; figures which
possess, above all, that winning attractiveness which there is no man
but would willingly exercise, and which resemble those works of art
which, though not meant to be very great or imposing, are yet wrought
of the choicest material. Mercutio, in “Romeo and Juliet,” belongs to
this group of Shakespeare’s characters—versatile, mercurial people,
such as make good actors, and in whom the

    “Nimble spirits of the arteries,”

the finer but still merely animal elements of great wit, predominate.
A careful delineation of minor yet expressive traits seems to mark
them out as the characters of his predilection; and it is hard not
to identify him with these more than with others. Biron, in “Love’s
Labour’s Lost,” is perhaps the most striking member of this group.
In this character, which is never quite in touch, never quite on a
perfect level of understanding, with the other persons of the play, we
see, perhaps, a reflex of Shakespeare himself, when he has just become
able to stand aside from and estimate the first period of his poetry.

                   “Love’s Labour’s Lost.” _Appreciations with an
                       Essay on Style._ 1889, pp. 174-5.

    See also “Shakspere’s English Kings,” _ib._, pp. 201-2.


MATTHEW ARNOLD, 1879

(1822-1888)

Let me have the pleasure of quoting a sentence about Shakespeare, which
I met with by accident not long ago in the _Correspondant_, a French
review which not a dozen English people, I suppose, look at. The writer
is praising Shakespeare’s prose. “With Shakespeare,” he says, “prose
comes in whenever the subject, being more familiar, is unsuited to the
majestic English iambic.” And he goes on: “Shakespeare is the king of
poetic rhythm and style, as well as the king of the realm of thought;
along with his dazzling prose, Shakespeare has succeeded in giving us
the most varied, the most harmonious verse which has ever sounded upon
the human ear since the verse of the Greeks.” M. Henry Cochin, the
writer of this sentence, deserves our gratitude for it; it would not
be easy to praise Shakespeare, in a single sentence, more justly. And
when a foreigner and a Frenchman writes thus of Shakespeare, and when
Goethe says of Milton, in whom there was so much to repel Goethe rather
than to attract him, that “nothing has ever been done so entirely in
the sense of the Greeks as _Samson Agonistes_,” and that “Milton is
in very truth a poet whom we must treat with all reverence,” then we
understand what constitutes a European recognition of poets and poetry
as contradistinguished from a merely national recognition, and that
in favour both of Milton and of Shakespeare the judgment of the high
court of appeal has finally gone.

                _Essays in Criticism._ Second Series: Wordsworth.
                    1888, pp. 129-31. Reprinted from Preface to
                    _The Poems of Wordsworth_, chosen and edited
                    by Matthew Arnold. 1879.

    For a comment on Shakespeare’s double faculty of interpreting
    the physiognomy and movement of the outward world, and the
    ideas and laws of man’s moral and spiritual nature, see _Essays
    in Criticism_, 1865, p. 108.


ANONYMOUS ?_c._ 1880

So much has been written, so much spoken about Shakespeare, that it
would seem a needless, almost a presumptuous superfluity to say more,
and yet from another point of view, the man is as strange to us to-day
as though we had never heard his name. Johnson and Pope, Warburton,
Steevens, Malone and Theobald, Chalmers, Dyce, and a host of foreign
exegetes, have edited and annotated, emendated and obelised; but the
figure of Shakespeare is clothed in mist, and whilst we laugh and
wonder at the vanity and versatility of a Cicero, and stroll lovingly
with a Horace about his Sabine farm, dead both of them two millennia,
we still grope about in the dark for the meaning, the character,
and the inner life of our wondrous poet. Like the ghost in Hamlet,
he arose, and, having uttered his pregnant message, disappeared,
unregarded at the time but by a few, and still unrealised by the many.

  .       .       .       .       .       .       .

There is a grandeur about the poets of the world, and a reward for
those that study them aright. Amid the hurricane of battle and the
crash of empires, the calm pulse of life and the glories of the drama
remain the same. Men are inclined to gaze upon the outward symbols of
existence as though they were primary causes, when they are only the
emblems of a deeper power. We have had our Constitution-builders, but
where are they? Our Tamerlanes and our Attilas, but whither are they
departed? The intellect that revolves a kingdom pales before a heart
that speaks to the soul of man. All nations turn their faces toward
a Hamlet, a Lear, or a Catherine of Aragon. The influence of these
through the genius of the poet will spread and yield abundant fruit,
when the havoc of a Cannæ or an Austerlitz is but dimly discernible in
the skeleton of history.

The study of our finer literature is therefore the study of the soul;
and the progress made will be upward and inward, and the result
a purifying of the ideals and a chastening of the chords of man.
Shakespeare gives us all this, he is ennobling as well as instructive;
without paying homage in a measure to his memory by the maintenance of
a certain form of excellence, no poet since his time has succeeded in
being appreciated as great. For they all bear his mark, and although
much below him, all dramatic writers since his day are modelled upon
his plan.

                 Manuscript Note inserted before fly-leaf of copy
                     of the 1602 quarto of _Merry Wives of
                     Windsor_, now in Rowfant Library. Printed in
                     _A Catalogue of the Printed Books, etc.,
                     collected since 1886 by the late Frederick
                     Locker Lampson_. 1900, pp. 28-30.


ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE, 1880

(_b._ 1837)

In his first stage Shakespeare had dropped his plummet no deeper into
the sea of the spirit of man than Marlowe had sounded before him; and
in the channel of simple emotion no poet could cast surer line with
steadier hand than he. Further down in the dark and fiery depths of
human pain and mortal passion no soul could search than his who first
rendered into speech the aspirations and the agonies of a ruined and
revolted spirit. And until Shakespeare found in himself the strength of
eyesight to read, and the cunning of handiwork to render those wider
diversities of emotion and those further complexities of character
which lay outside the range of Marlowe, he certainly cannot be said
to have outrun the winged feet, outstripped the fiery flight of his
forerunner. In the heaven of our tragic song, the first-born star on
the forehead of its herald god was not outshone till the full midsummer
meridian of that greater godhead before whom he was sent to prepare
a pathway for the sun. Through all the forenoon of our triumphant
day, till the utter consummation and ultimate ascension of dramatic
poetry incarnate and transfigured in the master-singer of the world,
the quality of his tragedy was as that of Marlowe’s, broad, single,
and intense; large of hand, voluble of tongue, direct of purpose.
With the dawn of its latter epoch a new power comes upon it, to find
clothing and expression in new forms of speech and after a new style.
The language has put off its foreign decorations of lyric and elegiac
ornament; it has found already its infinite gain in the loss of those
sweet superfluous graces which encumbered the march and enchained the
utterance of its childhood. The figures which it invests are now no
more types of a single passion, the incarnations of a single thought.
They now demand a scrutiny which tests the power of a mind and tries
the value of a judgment; they appeal to something more than the instant
apprehension which sufficed to respond to the immediate claim of those
that went before them. Romeo and Juliet were simply lovers, and their
names bring back to us no further thought than of their love and the
lovely sorrow of its end; Antony and Cleopatra shall be before all
things lovers, but the thought of their love and its triumphant tragedy
shall recall other things beyond number—all the forces and all the
fortunes of mankind, all the chance and all the consequence that waited
on their imperial passion, all the infinite variety of qualities and
powers wrought together and welded into the frame and composition of
that love which shook from end to end all nations and kingdoms of the
earth.

                        _A Study of Shakespeare._ 1880, pp. 77-9.


ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE, 1882

(_b._ 1837)

“_William Shakespeare._”

    Not if men’s tongues and angels’ all in one
        Spake, might the word be said that might speak thee.
        Streams, winds, woods, flowers, fields, mountains, yea the sea,
    What power is in them all to praise the sun?
    His praise is this,—he can be praised of none.
        Man, woman, child, praise God for him; but he
        Exults not to be worshipped, but to be.
    He is; and, being, beholds his work well done.
    All joy, all glory, all sorrow, all strength, all mirth,
    Are his: without him, day were night on earth.
        Time knows not his from time’s own period.
    All lutes, all harps, all viols, all flutes, all lyres,
    Fall dumb before him ere one string suspires.
        All stars are angels; but the sun is God.

                          _Tristram of Lyonesse and other Poems._
                              1882, p. 280.

    See also Mr. Swinburne’s _An Autumn Vision, October 31, 1889_.


GEORGE MEREDITH, 1883

(_b._ 1828)

“_The Spirit of Shakespeare._”

    Thy greatest knew thee, Mother Earth; unsoured
      He knew thy sons. He probed from hell to hell
    Of human passions, but of love deflowered
      His wisdom was not, for he knew thee well.
    Thence came the honeyed corner of his lips,
      The conquering smile wherein his spirit sails
    Calm as the God who the white sea-wave whips,
      Yet full of speech and intershifting tales,
    Close mirrors of us: thence had he the laugh
      We feel is thine: broad as ten thousand beeves
    At pasture! thence thy songs, that winnow chaff
      From grain, bid sick Philosophy’s last leaves
    Whirl, if they have no recompense—they enforced
    To fatten Earth when from her soul divorced.

    How smiles he at a generation ranked
      In gloomy noddings over life! They pass.
    Not he to feed upon a breast unthanked,
      Or eye a beauteous face in a cracked glass.
    But he can spy that little twist of brain
      Which moved some mighty leader of the blind,
    Unwitting ’twas the goad of personal pain,
      To view in curst eclipse our Mother’s mind,
    And show us of some rigid harridan
      The wretched bondman till the end of time.
    O lived the Master now to paint us Man,
      That little twist of brain would ring a chime
    Of whence it came and what it caused, to start
    Thunders of laughter, clearing air and heart.

                          _Poems and Lyrics of the Joy of Earth._
                              1883, pp. 161-2.


ROBERT BROWNING, 1884

(1812-1889)

“_The Names._”

    Shakespeare!—to such name’s sounding, what succeeds
        Fitly as a silence? Falter forth the spell,—
        Act follows word, the speaker knows full well,
    Nor tampers with its magic more than needs.
    Two names there are: That which the Hebrew reads
        With his soul only: if from lips it fell,
        Echo, back thundered by earth, heaven and hell,
    Would own, “Thou didst create us!” Nought impedes
    We voice the other name, man’s most of might,
        Awesomely, lovingly: let awe and love
    Mutely await their working, leave to sight
        All of the issue as below—above—
        Shakespeare’s creation rises: one remove
    Though dread—this finite from that infinite.

                    _Complete Poetic and Dramatic Works of Robert
                        Browning._ Cambridge edition, U.S.A.
                        1895.

    Browning wrote this sonnet as a contribution to the
    _Shakespearean Show-Book_ issued at the “Shakespearean Show”
    held in the Albert Hall, London, 29-31 May 1884, in aid of the
    Hospital for Women in Fulham Road. The sonnet is dated 12 March
    1884.


WILLIAM WETMORE STORY, 1886

(_b._ 1819)

“_The Mighty Makers._”

    Whose are those forms august that, in the press
        And busy blames and praises of to-day,
        Stand so serene above life’s fierce affray
    With ever youthful strength and loveliness?
    Those are the mighty makers, whom no stress
        Of time can shame, nor fashion sweep away,
        Whom Art begot on Nature in the play
    Of healthy passion, scorning base excess.
    Rising perchance in mists, and half obscure
        When up the horizon of their age they came,
          Brighter with years they shine in steadier light,
    Great constellations that will aye endure,
        Though myriad meteors of ephemeral fame
          Across them flash, to vanish into night.

    Such was our Chaucer in the early prime
        Of English verse, who held to Nature’s hand
        And walked serenely through its morning land,
    Gladsome and hale, brushing its dewy rime.
    And such was Shakespeare, whose strong soul could climb
        Steeps of sheer terror, sound the ocean grand
        Of passions deep, or over Fancy’s strand
    Trip with his fairies, keeping step and time.
    His too the power to laugh out full and clear,
        With unembittered joyance, and to move
        Along the silent, shadowy paths of love
    As tenderly as Dante, whose austere
        Stern spirit through the worlds below, above,
    Unsmiling strode, to tell their tidings here.

                               _Poems._ 1886, vol. ii. pp. 273-4.


THOMAS SPENCER BAYNES, 1886

(1823-1887)

Shakespeare’s work alone can be said to possess the organic strength
and infinite variety, the throbbing fulness, vital complexity, and
breathing truth of Nature herself. In points of artistic resource and
technical ability—such as copious and expressive diction, freshness and
pregnancy of verbal combination, richly modulated verse, and structural
skill in the handling of incident and action—Shakespeare’s supremacy
is indeed sufficiently assured. But, after all, it is of course in the
spirit and substance of his work, his power of piercing to the hidden
centres of character, of touching the deepest springs of impulse and
passion, out of which are the issues of life, and of evolving those
issues dramatically with a flawless strength, subtlety, and truth,
which raises him so immensely above and beyond not only the best of
the playwrights who went before him, but the whole line of illustrious
dramatists that came after him. It is Shakespeare’s unique distinction
that he has an absolute command over all the complexities of thought
and feeling that prompt to action and bring out the dividing lines of
character. He sweeps with the hand of a master the whole gamut of human
experience, from the lowest note to the very top of its compass, from
the sportive childish treble of Mamilius, and the pleading boyish tones
of Prince Arthur, up to the spectre-haunted terrors of Macbeth, the
tropical passion of Othello, the agonised sense and tortured spirit
of Hamlet, the sustained elemental grandeur, the Titanic force, the
utterly tragical pathos of Lear.

                     _Encyclopædia Britannica._ 9th edition. Art.
                         “Shakespeare.” Vol. xxi. 1886, p. 763.


GERALD MASSEY, 1888

(_b._ 1828)

    Our Prince of Peace in glory hath gone,
    With no Spear shaken, no Sword drawn,
    No Cannon fired, no flag unfurled,
    To make his conquest of the World.

    For him no Martyr-fires have blazed,
    No limbs been racked, no scaffolds raised;
    For him no life was ever shed,
    To make the Victor’s pathway red.

    And for all time he wears the Crown
    Of lasting, limitless renown:
    He reigns, whatever Monarchs fall;
    His Throne is in the heart of all.

               _The Secret Drama of Shakespeare’s Sonnets._ 1888.


WALT WHITMAN, 1890

(1819-1892)

The inward and outward characteristics of Shakespeare are his vast and
rich variety of persons and themes, with his wondrous delineation of
each and all—not only limitless funds of verbal and pictorial resource,
but great excess, superfœtation—mannerism, like a fine aristocratic
perfume, holding a touch of musk (Euphues, his mark)—with boundless
sumptuousness and adornment, real velvet and gems, not shoddy nor
paste—but a good deal of bombast and fustian—(certainly some terrific
mouthing in Shakespeare!).

Superb and inimitable as all is, it is mostly an objective and
physiological kind of power and beauty the soul finds in Shakespeare—a
style supremely grand of the sort, but in my opinion stopping short of
the grandest sort, at any rate for fulfilling and satisfying modern
and scientific and democratic American purposes. Think, not of growths
as forests primeval, or Yellowstone geysers, or Colorado ravines, but
of costly marble palaces, and palace rooms, and the noblest fixings
and furniture, and noble owners and occupants to correspond—think of
carefully built gardens from the beautiful but sophisticated gardening
art at its best, with walks and bowers and artificial lakes, and
appropriate statue groups, and the finest cultivated roses and lilies
and japonicas in plenty—and you have the tally of Shakespeare. The
low characters, mechanics, even the loyal henchmen—all in themselves
nothing—serve as capital foils to the aristocracy. The comedies
(exquisite as they certainly are), bringing in admirably portrayed
common characters, have the unmistakable hue of plays, portraits, made
for the divertisement only of the élite of the castle, and from its
point of view. The comedies are altogether non-acceptable to America
and Democracy.

But to the deepest soul, it seems a shame to pick and choose from the
riches Shakespeare has left us—to criticise his infinitely royal,
multiform quality—to gauge, with optic glasses, the dazzle of his
sun-like beams.

             From _Poet-Lore_, July 1890. _Complete Prose Works._
                 Boston, Mass., 1898, p. 394.

    Walt Whitman, when he says that “the comedies are altogether
    non-acceptable to America and Democracy,” states rather what
    he considers ought to be, than what actually is. In his essay,
    “Poetry To-day in America,” he says of Shakespeare, “In
    portraying mediæval European lords and barons, the arrogant
    poet, so dear to the inmost human heart (pride! pride! dearest,
    perhaps, of all—touching us, too, of the States closest of
    all—closer than love), he stands alone, and I do not wonder he
    so witches the world.”—_Prose Works_, Boston, 1898, p. 283.


RICHARD WATSON GILDER, 1891

(_b._ 1844)

“_The Twenty-Third of April._”

    A little English earth and breathèd air
      Made Shakespeare the divine; so is his verse
    The broidered soil of every blossom fair;
      So doth his song all sweet bird-songs rehearse.
    But tell me, then, what wondrous stuff did fashion
      That part of him which took those wilding flights
    Among imagined worlds; whence the white passion
      That burned three centuries through the days and nights!
    Not heaven’s four winds could make, nor round the earth,
      The soul wherefrom the soul of Hamlet flamed;
    Nor anything of merely mortal birth
      Could lighten as when Shakespeare’s name is named.
    How was his body bred we know full well,
    But that high soul’s engendering who may tell!

                      “Five Books of Song.” IV. _The Two Worlds._
                          1894, p. 154.


MATHILDE BLIND, _c._ 1894

(1841-1896)

“_Shakespeare._”

    Yearning to know herself for all she was,
      Her passionate clash of warring good and ill,
      Her new life ever ground in Death’s old mill,
    With every delicate detail and _en masse_,—
    Blind Nature strove. Lo, then it came to pass,
      That Time, to work out her unconscious will,
      Once wrought the mind which she had groped to fill,
    And she beheld herself as in a glass.

    The world of men, unrolled before our sight,
      Showed like a map, where stream and waterfall,
    And village-cradling vale and cloud-capped height
      Stand faithfully recorded, great and small,
    For Shakespeare was, and at his touch with light
      Impartial as the sun’s, revealed the All.

                “Shakespeare Sonnets, VII.” _Poetical Works._ Ed.
                    Arthur Symons. 1900, p. 443.


ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON, BEFORE 1892

(1809-1892)

There are three repartees in Shakespeare which always bring tears to my
eyes from their simplicity.

One is in _King Lear_, when Lear says to Cordelia, “So young and so
untender,” and Cordelia lovingly answers, “So young, my lord, and
true.” And in _The Winter’s Tale_, when Florizel takes Perdita’s hand
to lead her to the dance, and says, “So turtles pair that never mean
to part,” and the little Perdita answers, giving her hand to Florizel,
”I’ll swear for ’em.” And in _Cymbeline_, when Imogen in tender rebuke
says to her husband:

    “Why did you throw your wedded lady from you?
     Think that you are upon a rock; and now,
     Throw me again!”

and Posthumus does not ask forgiveness, but answers, kissing her:

                    “Hang there like fruit, my soul,
    Till the tree die.”

                   _Life and Works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson._ Ed.
                       Hallam, Lord Tennyson. 1898, vol. iv. pp.
                       39 _et seq._

    See also _ib._, pp. 39-43.


SIDNEY LEE, 1899

(_b._ 1859)

Shakespeare’s mind, as Hazlitt suggested, contained within itself the
germs of all faculty and feeling. He knew intuitively how every faculty
and feeling would develop in any conceivable change of fortune. Men
and women—good or bad, old or young, wise or foolish, merry or sad,
rich or poor—yielded their secrets to him, and his genius enabled him
to give being in his pages to all the shapes of humanity that present
themselves on the highway of life. Each of his characters gives voice
to thought or passion with an individuality and a naturalness that
rouse in the intelligent playgoer and reader the illusion that they are
overhearing men and women speak unpremeditatingly among themselves,
rather than that they are reading written speeches or hearing written
speeches recited. The more closely the words are studied, the completer
the illusion grows. Creatures of the imagination—fairies, ghosts,
witches—are delineated with a like potency, and the reader or spectator
feels instinctively that these supernatural entities could not speak,
feel, or act otherwise than Shakespeare represents them. The creative
power of poetry was never manifested to such effect as in the corporeal
semblances in which Shakespeare clad the spirits of the air.

So mighty a faculty sets at nought the common limitations of
nationality, and in every quarter of the globe to which civilised life
has penetrated, Shakespeare’s power is recognised. All the world over,
language is applied to his creations that ordinarily applies to beings
of flesh and blood. Hamlet and Othello, Lear and Macbeth, Falstaff and
Shylock, Brutus and Romeo, Ariel and Caliban are studied in almost
every civilised tongue as if they were historic personalities, and the
chief of the impressive phrases that fall from their lips are rooted
in the speech of civilised humanity. To Shakespeare the intellect of
the world, speaking in divers accents, applies with one accord his own
words: “How noble in reason! how infinite in faculty! in apprehension
how like a god!”

                  _Life of William Shakespeare._ 1899, chap. xxi.




PART II

“GOOD SENTENCES”


    Good sentences.

                                 _Merchant of Venice_, I. ii. 11.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Brief, short, quick, snap.

                                         _Merry Wives_, IV. v. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

    In the quick forge and working-house of thought.

                                          _Henry V._ V. prol. 23.

       *       *       *       *       *

    A good swift simile.

                                _Taming of the Shrew_, V. ii. 54.




“GOOD SENTENCES”


    Shakespeare, we must be silent in thy praise,
    ’Cause our encomions will but blast thy bays,
    Which envy could not, that thou didst so well,
    Let thine own histories prove thy chronicle.

                        ANONYMOUS. Epig. 25. _Witts Recreations._
                            1640, printed 1639.

       *       *       *       *       *

    To-day we bring old gather’d herbs, ’tis true,
    But such as in sweet Shakespeare’s garden grew.
    And all his plants immortal you esteem,
    Your mouths are never out of taste with him.

                 JOHN CROWNE (_d._ 1703?). Prologue to _Henry the
                     Sixth, the First Part_. Adapted from
                     Shakespeare’s _1 Henry VI._ 1681. Sig. A2.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Shakespeare (whom you and every playhouse bill
    Style the divine, the matchless, what you will)
    For gain, not glory, wing’d his roving flight,
    And grew immortal in his own despite.

              ALEXANDER POPE (1688-1744). _Imitations of Horace._
                  Bk. II. ch. i. ll. 69-72. 1737.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Thrice happy! could we catch great Shakespeare’s art,
    To trace the deep recesses of the heart;
    His simple plain sublime, to which is given
    To strike the soul with darted flame from heaven.

                  JAMES THOMSON (1700-1748). Prologue to _Tancred
                      and Sigismundâ_. 1745. Sig. A4.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Let others seek a monumental fame,
    And leave for one short age a pompous name;
    Thou dost not e’en this little tomb require,
    Shakespeare can only with the world expire.

              Epitaph on a Tombstone of Shakespeare. _Gentleman’s
                  Magazine._ June 1767, vol. xxvii. p. 324.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare came out of Nature’s hand like Pallas out of Jove’s head,
at full growth and mature.

                          GEORGE COLMAN (1733-1794), before 1767.

    George Colman, who advocated the theory that Shakespeare had
    some classic learning, commenting in the Appendix to the second
    edition of his translation of the comedies of Terence (1768)
    on Richard Farmer’s _Essay on the Learning of Shakespeare_
    (1767), which maintains that Shakespeare got his knowledge of
    the ancients from translations, says: “Mr. Farmer closes these
    general testimonies of Shakespeare’s having been only indebted
    to Nature, by saying, ‘He came out of her hand, _as some one
    else expresses it_, like Pallas out of Jove’s head, at full
    growth and mature.’ It is whimsical enough, that this _some
    one else_, whose expression is here quoted to countenance the
    general notion of Shakespeare’s want of literature, should be
    no other than myself. Mr. Farmer does not choose to mention
    where he met with this expression of _some one else_; and _some
    one else_ does not choose to mention where he dropped it.”
    Colman’s “Appendix” was printed in the “Variorum” editions of
    Shakespeare, and that of 1785 gave an anonymous note, stating
    that Young “in his _Conjectures on Original Composition_ (vol.
    v. p. 100, ed. 1773) has the following sentence: ‘An adult
    genius comes out of Nature’s hands, as Pallas out of Jove’s
    head, at full growth and mature.’ Shakespeare’s genius was
    of this kind.” Young’s _Conjectures_ appeared in 1759, so
    perhaps Colman borrowed, though, as he says (_Prose on Several
    Occasions_, 1787, ii. p. 186), “The thought is obvious, and
    might, without improbability, occur to different writers.” At
    any rate, his form of the thought is better than Young’s, so he
    has here been given the credit for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

    To mark her Shakespeare’s worth, and Britain’s love,
    Let Pope design, and Burlington approve:
    Superfluous care! when distant times shall view
    This tomb grown old—his works shall still be new.

                       RICHARD GRAVES (1715-1804). “On erecting a
                           Monument to Shakespeare under the
                           direction of Mr. Pope and Lord
                           Burlington.” _Euphrosyne_, 1776.

    This refers to the monument erected by public subscription in
    Westminster Abbey in 1741. The design was by William Kent, and
    the statue of Shakespeare, which was part of it, was executed
    by Peter Scheemachers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our modern tragedies, hundreds of them do not contain a good line; nor
are they a jot the better, because Shakespeare, who was superior to all
mankind, wrote some whole plays that are as bad as any of our present
writers’.

                 HORACE WALPOLE (1717-1797). Letter to Sir Horace
                     Mann, Oct. 8, 1778. _Letters._ Ed. Peter
                     Cunningham, 1858, vol. vii. p. 135.

       *       *       *       *       *

Write like Shakespeare, and laugh at the critics.

                 DANIEL WEBB (1719?-1798). _Literary Amusements_,
                     1787, p. 22.

       *       *       *       *       *

                    Shakespeare, . . .
    Lord of the mighty spell: around him press
    Spirits and fairy forms. He, ruling wide
      His visionary world, bids terror fill
      The shivering breast, or softer pity thrill
    E’en to the inmost heart.

                         W. L. BOWLES (1762-1850). “Monody on the
                             Death of Dr. Warton,” 1801. _Poems_,
                             1803, vol. ii. pp. 141-2.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Is there no bard of heavenly power possess’d,
    To thrill, to rouse, to animate the breast?
    Like Shakespeare o’er the sacred mind to sway,
    And call each wayward passion to obey?

                           F. D. HEMANS (1793-1835). “England and
                               Spain,” 1807.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our love of Shakespeare, therefore, is not a _monomania_ or solitary
and unaccountable infatuation; but is merely the natural love which
all men bear to those forms of excellence that are accommodated to
their peculiar character, temperament, and situation; and which will
always return, and assert its power over their affections, long after
authority has lost its reverence, fashions been antiquated, and
artificial tastes passed away.

                     FRANCIS LORD JEFFREY (1773-1850). _Edinburgh
                         Review_, Aug. 1811, vol. xviii. p. 285.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare had the inward clothing of a fine mind; the outward
covering of solid reading, of critical observation, and the richest
eloquence; and compared with these, what are the trappings of the
schools?

                        GEORGE DYER (1755-1841). “The Relation of
                            Poetry to the Arts and Sciences,” in
                            _The Reflector_, 1811. Reprinted in
                            _Poetics_, 1812, ii. p. 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare has been accused of profaneness. I for my part have
acquired from perusal of him, a habit of looking into my own heart,
and am confident that Shakespeare is an author of all others the most
calculated to make his readers better as well as wiser.

         S. T. COLERIDGE (1772-1834). “Outline of an introductory
             Lecture on Shakespeare,” 1812.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let no man blame his son for learning history from Shakespeare.

                _Id._ _Seven Lectures on Shakespeare and Milton._
                    Ed. J. P. Collier, p. 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

The greatest genius that, perhaps, human nature has yet produced, our
_myriad-minded_[232:1] Shakespeare.

                    _Id._ _Biographia Literaria_, 1817, chap. xv.


FOOTNOTES:

[232:1] Coleridge says that he borrowed this phrase from a Greek monk,
who applied it to a Patriarch of Constantinople.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great, ever-living, dead man.

                                                          _Ibid._

       *       *       *       *       *

                          Humanity’s divinest son,
    That sprightliest, gravest, wisest, kindest one—
    Shakespeare.

                    LEIGH HUNT (1784-1859). _Thoughts of the Avon
                        on 28 Sept. 1817._

       *       *       *       *       *

His plays alone are properly expressions of the passions, not
descriptions of them. His characters are real beings of flesh and
blood; they speak like men, not like authors.

                     WILLIAM HAZLITT (1778-1830). “On Shakespeare
                         and Milton,” _Lectures on the English
                         Poets_, 1818, p. 98.

       *       *       *       *       *

In trying to recollect any other author, one sometimes stumbles, in
case of failure, on a word as good. In Shakespeare, any other word but
the true one, is sure to be wrong.[234:1]

                                                 _Ibid._, p. 108.


FOOTNOTES:

[234:1] “These remarks,” Hazlitt adds, “are strictly applicable only
to the impassioned parts of Shakespeare’s language, which flowed from
the warmth and originality of his imagination, and were his own. The
language used for prose conversation and ordinary business is sometimes
technical, and involved in the affectation of the time.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare was the least of a coxcomb of any one that ever lived, and
much of a gentleman.

                                                 _Ibid._, p. 111.

       *       *       *       *       *

    . . . Divinest Shakespeare’s might
    Fills Avon and the world with light,
    Like omniscient power which he
    Imaged ’mid mortality.

                  P. B. SHELLEY (1792-1822). “Lines written among
                      the Euganean Hills,” October 1818.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare led a life of allegory: his works are the comments on it.

                     JOHN KEATS (1795-1821). Letter to George and
                         Georgiana Keats, 18 Feb. 1819.

       *       *       *       *       *

If we wish to know the force of human genius, we should read
Shakespeare. If we wish to see the insignificance of human learning, we
may study his commentators.

                 WILLIAM HAZLITT (1778-1830). _Table Talk_, 1821,
                     vol. i. p. 177.

       *       *       *       *       *

    . . . Shakespeare, who in our hearts for himself hath erected an empire
    Not to be shaken by time, nor e’er by another divided.

                         ROBERT SOUTHEY (1774-1843). _A Vision of
                             Judgment_, 1821, ix. ll. 17, 18.

       *       *       *       *       *

I look upon him to be the worst of models, though the most
extraordinary of writers.

                        LORD BYRON (1788-1824). Letter to Murray,
                            14 July 1821. Moore’s _Life of
                            Byron_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Schiller has the material sublime: to produce an effect, he sets you
a whole town on fire, and throws infants with their mothers into the
flames, or locks up a father in an old tower. But Shakespeare drops a
handkerchief, and the same or greater effects follow.

                       S. T. COLERIDGE (1772-1834). _Table Talk_,
                           29 Dec. 1822.

       *       *       *       *       *

                          An immortal man,—
    Nature’s chief darling, and illustrious mate,
      Destined to foil old Death’s oblivious plan,
    And shine untarnish’d by the fogs of Fate,
    Time’s famous rival till the final date!

                        THOMAS HOOD (1799-1845). _The Plea of the
                            Midsummer Fairies_, cv. 1827, p. 53.

       *       *       *       *       *

Who knows or can figure what the Man Shakespeare was, by the first, by
the twentieth, perusal of his works? He is a Voice coming to us from
the Land of Melody: his old brick dwelling-place, in the mere earthly
burgh of Stratford-on-Avon, offers us the most inexplicable enigma.

          THOMAS CARLYLE (1795-1881). _Critical and Miscellaneous
              Essays_, “Goethe.” Reprinted from _Foreign Review_,
              No. 3, 1828.

       *       *       *       *       *

Students of poetry admire Shakespeare in their tenth year; but go on
admiring him more and more, understanding him more and more, till their
threescore-and-tenth.

                                                          _Ibid._

       *       *       *       *       *

No one can understand Shakespeare’s superiority fully until he has
ascertained, by comparison, all that which he possessed in common with
several other great dramatists of his age, and has then calculated the
surplus which is entirely Shakespeare’s own.

                       S. T. COLERIDGE (1772-1834). _Table Talk_,
                           12 May 1830.

       *       *       *       *       *

    His was the wizard spell,
      The spirit to enchain:
    His grasp o’er nature fell,
      Creation own’d his reign.

                  “Poetical Portraits” by A Modern Pythagorean in
                  _Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine_, vol. xxvii.
                  1830, p. 632.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not too much to say, that the great plays of Shakespeare would
lose less by being deprived of all the passages which are commonly
called the fine passages, than those passages lose by being read
separately from the play. This is, perhaps, the highest praise which
can be given to a dramatist.

                   LORD MACAULAY (1800-1859). _Edinburgh Review_,
                       June 1831, vol. liii. pp. 567-8.

       *       *       *       *       *

I believe Shakespeare was not a whit more intelligible in his own day
than he is now to an educated man, except for a few local allusions
of no consequence. And I said, he is of no age—nor, I may add, of
any religion, or party, or profession. The body and substance of his
works came out of the unfathomable depths of his own oceanic mind: his
observation and reading, which were considerable, supplied him with the
drapery of his figures.

                       S. T. COLERIDGE (1772-1834). _Table Talk_,
                           15 March 1834.

       *       *       *       *       *

I would be willing to live only as long as Shakespeare were the mirror
to Nature.

                            _Id._, _Letters_, etc., 1836, i. 196.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Than Shakespeare and Petrarch pray who are more living?
    Whose words more delight us? whose touches more _touch_?

                   LEIGH HUNT (1784-1859). “Blue-stocking Revels;
                       or, the Feast of the Violets.” Canto III.
                       _Monthly Repository_, 1837.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the gravest sense it may be affirmed of Shakespeare, that he is
among the modern luxuries of life.

                        T. DE QUINCEY (1785-1859). “Shakespeare,”
                            _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 7th ed.,
                            1842. Written 1838.

       *       *       *       *       *

Produce us from any drama of Shakespeare one of those leading passages
that all men have by heart, and show us any eminent defect in the very
sinews of the thought. It is impossible; defects there may be, but they
will always be found irrelevant to the main central thought, or to its
expression.

                _Id._ “Pope,” _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 7th ed.,
                    1842. Written 1839.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare, a wool-comber, poacher, or whatever else at Stratford in
Warwickshire, who happened to write books! The finest human figure, as
I apprehend, that Nature has hitherto seen fit to make of our widely
diffused Teutonic clay. Saxon, Norman, Celt or Sarmat, I find no human
soul so beautiful, these fifteen hundred known years;—our supreme
modern European man.

                      THOMAS CARLYLE (1795-1881). “Geschichte der
                          Teutschen Sippschaft,” translated by
                          Carlyle in _Chartism_, 1839. _Critical
                          and Miscellaneous Essays._

       *       *       *       *       *

It is to be doubted whether even Shakespeare could have told a story
like Homer, owing to that incessant activity and superfœtation of
thought, a little less of which might be occasionally desired even in
his plays;—if it were possible, once possessing anything of his, to
wish it away.

                        LEIGH HUNT (1784-1859). “What is Poetry?”
                            _Imagination and Fancy_, 1844. Ed.
                            A. S. Cook, 1893, p. 65.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, literature, philosophy, and thought are Shakespearised. His mind
is the horizon beyond which, at present, we do not see.

                       R. W. EMERSON (1803-1882). “Representative
                           Men.” _Shakespeare; or the Poet_, 1844.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Shakespeare, on whose forehead climb
    The crowns o’ the world: O eyes sublime,
    With tears and laughter for all time!

                 E. B. BROWNING (1809-1861). _A Vision of Poets_,
                     1844.

       *       *       *       *       *

A rib of Shakespeare would have made a Milton: the same portion of
Milton, all poets born ever since.

             W. S. LANDOR (1775-1846). “Imaginary Conversations.”
                 _Works_, 1846, ii. p. 74.

       *       *       *       *       *

    In poetry there is but one supreme,
    Tho’ there are many angels round his throne,
    Mighty, and beauteous, while his face is hid.

                               _Id._ “On Shakespeare.” “Poems and
                                   Epigrams.” _Works_, 1846.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long list can be cited of passages in Shakespeare, which have been
solemnly denounced by many eminent men (all blockheads) as ridiculous:
and if a man _does_ find a passage in a tragedy that displeases him, it
is sure to seem ludicrous: witness the indecent exposures of themselves
made by Voltaire, La Harpe, and many billions beside of bilious people.

                 T. DE QUINCEY (1785-1859). “Schlosser’s Literary
                     History.” _Tait’s Magazine_, Sept., Oct.,
                     1847.

       *       *       *       *       *

    A thousand poets pried at life,
    And only one amid the strife
    Rose to be Shakespeare.

                      R. BROWNING (1812-1889). _Christmas Eve and
                          Christmas Day_, xvi., 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I began to give myself up to the profession of a poet for life,
I was impressed with a conviction, that there were four English
poets whom I must have continually before me as examples—Chaucer,
Shakespeare, Spenser, and Milton. These I must study, and equal _if I
could_; and I need not think of the rest.

                    WILLIAM WORDSWORTH (1770-1850). _Memoirs._ By
                        Christopher Wordsworth, 1851, vol. ii. p.
                        470.

       *       *       *       *       *

I cannot account for Shakespeare’s low estimate of his own writings,
except from the sublimity, the superhumanity of his genius. They were
infinitely below his conception of what they might have been, and ought
to have been.

                                                          _Ibid._

       *       *       *       *       *

    . . . Matchless Shakespeare, who, undaunted, took
    From Nature’s shrinking hand her secret book,
    And page by page the wondrous tome explored.

                    D. M. MOIR (1798-1851), before 1851. “Stanzas
                        on an Infant.” _Poetical Works_, 1852,
                        vol. ii. p. 50.

       *       *       *       *       *

      Shakespeare’s glowing soul,
    Where mightiness and meekness met.

                             _Ibid._, p. 341, “Hymn to the Moon.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    Kind Shakespeare, our recording angel.

                     T. L. BEDDOES (1803-1849). “Lines written in
                         Switzerland.” _Poems_, 1851, vol. i. p.
                         215.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Kinder all earth hath grown since genial Shakespeare sung!

                     EDWARD BULWER, LORD LYTTON (1805-1873). “The
                         Souls of Books,” i. l. 21. _Works_,
                         1853, vol. iii. p. 282.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Shakespeare . . .
                            . . . Wise and true,
    Bright as the noon-tide, clear as morning dew,
    And wholesome in the spirit and the form.

                       CHARLES MACKAY (1814-1899). “Mist.” _Under
                           Green Leaves_, 1857.

       *       *       *       *       *

I care not how Shakespeare is acted: with him the thought suffices.

                          ABRAHAM LINCOLN (1809-1865), _c._ 1860.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am always happy to meet persons who perceive the transcendent
superiority of Shakespeare over all other writers.

                   R. W. EMERSON (1803-1882). “Culture.” _Conduct
                       of Life_, 1860.

       *       *       *       *       *

We may consider Shakespeare, as an ancient mythologist would have done,
as “enskied” among “the invulnerable clouds,” where no shaft, even of
envy, can assail him. From this elevation we may safely predict that he
never can be plucked.

             CARDINAL WISEMAN (1802-1856). _William Shakespeare_,
                 1865, p. 28.

       *       *       *       *       *

To say truth, what I most of all admire are the traces he shows of a
talent that could have turned the _History of England_ into a kind of
_Iliad_, almost perhaps into a kind of _Bible_.

                   THOMAS CARLYLE (1795-1881). “Shooting Niagara:
                       and After?” _Macmillan’s Magazine_,
                       August, 1867.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Shakespeare! loveliest of souls,
    Peerless in radiance, in joy.

                     MATTHEW ARNOLD (1822-1888). “Heine’s Grave.”
                         _New Poems_, 1867, p. 198.

       *       *       *       *       *

If Shakespeare did not know the ancients, I think they were at least as
unlucky in not knowing him.

                      J. R. LOWELL (1819-1891). _Among my Books_,
                          1870, p. 190.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare recognised both our human imperfections and our human
greatness. . . . A woman is dearer to Shakespeare than an angel; a man
is better than a god.

                EDWARD DOWDEN (_b._ 1843). _Shakespeare: His Mind
                    and Art_, 1875, p. 346.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare frequently has lines and passages in a strain quite false,
and which are entirely unworthy of him. But one can imagine his smiling
if one could meet him in the Elysian Fields and tell him so; smiling
and replying that he knew it perfectly well himself, and what did it
matter?

                 MATTHEW ARNOLD (1822-1888). “Preface to Poems of
                     Wordsworth,” 1879. _Essays in Criticism_,
                     2nd ser., p. 135.

       *       *       *       *       *

          All Castaly flowed crystalline
    In gentle Shakespeare’s modulated breath.

              D. G. ROSSETTI (1828-1882). “On certain Elizabethan
                  Revivals.” _Recollections of D. G. Rossetti._
                  By T. Hall Caine, 1882, p. 256.

       *       *       *       *       *

Conception, fundamental brain work, that is what makes the difference
in all art. Work your metal as much as you like, but first take care
that it is gold, and worth working. A Shakespearean sonnet is better
than the most perfect in form, because Shakespeare wrote it.

                                                 _Ibid._, p. 249.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I close your Marlowe’s page, my Shakespeare’s ope,
      How welcome—after gong and cymbal’s din—
    The continuity, the long slow slope
      And vast curves of the gradual violin!

              WILLIAM WATSON (_b._ 1858). _Epigrams of Art, Life,
                  and Nature_, 1884, vii.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare illustrates every phase and variety of humour: a complete
analysis of Shakespeare’s humour would make a system of psychology.

               G. MOULTON (_b._ 1849). _Shakespeare as a Dramatic
                   Artist_, 1893, p. 285.

       *       *       *       *       *

From Shakespeare, no doubt, the world may learn, and has learnt, much;
yet he professed so little to be a teacher, that he has often been
represented as almost without personal opinions, as a mere undisturbed
mirror, in which all Nature reflects herself. Something like a century
passed before it was perceived that his works deserved to be in a
serious sense studied.

                 J. R. SEELEY (1834-1895). _Goethe reviewed after
                     Sixty Years_, 1894, p. 98.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare and Chaucer throw off, at noble work, the lower part of
their natures as they would a rough dress.

                JOHN RUSKIN (1819-1900). _Fors Clavigera._ Letter
                    XXXIV., 1896, ii. 235.




PART III

“ROUND ABOUT”


    What’s here? A scroll; and written round about?
    Let’s see.

                                  _Titus Andronicus_, IV. ii. 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

    With his steerage shall your thoughts grow on.

                                          _Pericles_, IV. iv. 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Falstaff._ Of what quality was your love, then?

    _Ford._ Like a fair house built on another man’s ground.

                                      _Merry Wives_, II. ii. 223.




“ROUND ABOUT”


MARGARET CAVENDISH, DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE, 1664

(1624?-1674)

Remember, when we were very young maids, one day we were discoursing
about lovers, and we did enjoin each other to confess who professed to
love us, and whom we loved, and I confessed I was in love with three
dead men, which were dead long before my time, the one was Cæsar, for
his valour, the second Ovid, for his wit, and the third our countryman
Shakespeare, for his comical and tragical humour; but soon after we
both married two worthy men, and I will leave you to your own husband,
for you best know what he is. As for my husband, I know him to have
the valour of Cæsar, the fancy and wit of Ovid, and the tragical,
especially comical art of Shakespeare, in truth, he is as far beyond
Shakespeare for comical humour, as Shakespeare is beyond an ordinary
poet in that way.

              Letter CLXII. _CCXI Sociable Letters written by the
                  Lady Marchioness of Newcastle_, 1664. Letters
                  CXXIII. and CLXII.


JOSEPH ADDISON, 1711

(1672-1719)

Some years ago I was at the tragedy of “Macbeth,” and unfortunately
placed myself under a woman of quality, that is since dead; who, as I
found by the noise she made, was newly returned from France. A little
before the rising of the curtain, she broke out into a loud soliloquy,
“When will the dear witches enter?” and immediately upon their first
appearance, asked a lady that sat three boxes from her, on her right
hand, if those witches were not charming creatures. A little later, as
Betterton was in one of the finest speeches of the play, she shook her
fan at another lady, who sat as far on her left hand, and told her in
a whisper that might be heard all over the pit, “We must not expect to
see Balloon to-night.” Not long after, calling out to a young baronet
by his name, who sat three seats before me, she asked him whether
Macbeth’s wife was still alive; and before he could give an answer,
fell a-talking of the ghost of Banquo. She had by this time formed a
little audience to herself, and fixed the attention of all about her.
But as I had a mind to hear the play, I got out of the sphere of her
impertinence, and planted myself in one of the remotest corners of the
pit.

                          _The Spectator_, No. 45, 21 April 1711.


HENRY FIELDING, 1743

(1707-1754)

I then observed Shakespeare standing between Betterton and Booth, and
deciding a difference between these two great actors concerning the
placing an accent in one of his lines: this was disputed on both sides
with a warmth which surprised me in Elysium, till I discovered by
intuition that every soul retained its principal characteristic, being,
indeed, its very essence. The line was that celebrated one in _Othello_—

    Put out the light, and then put out the light,

according to Betterton. Mr. Booth contended to have it thus:—

    Put out the light, and then put out _the_ light.

I could not help offering my conjecture on this occasion, and suggested
it might perhaps be—

    Put out the light, and then put out _thy_ light.

Another hinted a reading very sophisticated in my opinion—

    Put out the light, and then put out _thee_, light.

Making light to be the vocative case. Another would have altered the
last word, and read—

    Put out thy light, and then put out thy _sight_.

But Betterton said, if the text was to be disturbed, he saw no reason
why a word might not be changed as well as a letter, and instead of
“put out thy light,” you may read “put out thy eyes.” At last it was
agreed on all sides to refer the matter to the decision of Shakespeare
himself, who delivered his sentiments as follows: “Faith, gentlemen,
it is so long since I wrote the line, I have forgot my meaning. This I
know, could I have dreamt so much nonsense would have been talked and
writ about it, I would have blotted it out of my works; for I am sure,
if any of these be my meaning, it doth me very little honour.”

He was then interrogated concerning some other ambiguous passages
in his works; but he declined any satisfactory answer; saying, if
Mr. Theobald had not writ about it sufficiently, there were three or
four more new editions of his plays coming out, which he hoped would
satisfy every one: concluding, “I marvel nothing so much as that men
will gird themselves at discovering obscure beauties in an author.
Certes the greatest and most pregnant beauties are ever the plainest
and most evidently striking; and when two meanings of a passage can in
the least balance our judgments which to prefer, I hold it matter of
unquestionable certainty that neither of them is worth a farthing.”

From his works our conversation turned on his monument; upon which
Shakespeare, shaking his sides, and addressing himself to Milton, cried
out, “On my word, brother Milton, they have brought a noble set of
poets together; they would have been hanged erst have convened such a
company at their tables when alive.” “True, brother,” answered Milton,
“unless we had been as incapable of eating then as we are now.”

                         “A Journey from this World to the Next,”
                             Chapter viii. _Miscellanies_, 1743.


THOMAS EDWARDS, 1747

(1699-1757)

CANON I. A Professed Critic has a right to declare that his Author
wrote whatever He thinks he ought to have written, with as much
positiveness as if he had been at his elbow.

CANON II. He has a right to alter any passage which He does not
understand.

CANON III. These alterations He may make in spite of the exactness of
measure.

CANON IV. Where He does not like an expression, and yet cannot mend it,
He may abuse his Author for it.

CANON V. Or He may condemn it as a foolish interpolation.

CANON VI. As every Author is to be corrected into all possible
perfection, the Professed Critic is the sole judge; He may alter any
word or phrase, which does not want amendment, or which _will do_,
provided He can think of anything which He imagines _will do better_.

CANON VII. He may find out obsolete words, or coin new ones, and put
them in the place of such as He does not like, or does not understand.

CANON VIII. He may prove a reading or support an explanation by any
sort of reasons, no matter whether good or bad.

CANON IX. He may interpret his Author so as to make him mean directly
contrary to what he says.

CANON X. He should not allow any poetical licences, which He does not
understand.

CANON XI. He may make foolish amendments or explanations, and refute
them, only to enhance the value of his critical skill.

CANON XII. He may find out a bawdy or immoral meaning in his Author
where there does not appear to be any hint that way.

CANON XIII. He need not attend to the low accuracy of orthography, or
pointing; but may ridicule such trivial criticisms in others.

CANON XIV. Yet, when He pleases to condescend to such work, He may
value himself upon it; and not only restore lost puns, but point out
such quaintnesses where, perhaps, the Author never thought of them.

CANON XV. He may explain a difficult passage by words absolutely
unintelligible.

CANON XVI. He may contradict himself for the sake of showing his
critical skill on both sides of the question.

CANON XVII. It will be necessary for the Professed Critic to have by
him a good number of pedantic and abusive expressions, to throw about
upon proper occasions.

CANON XVIII. He may explain his Author, or any former Editor of him, by
supplying such words, or pieces of words, or marks, as He thinks fit
for that purpose.

CANON XIX. He may use the very same reasons for confirming his own
observations, which he has disallowed in his adversary.

CANON XX. As the design of writing notes is not so much to explain
the Author’s meaning as to display the Critic’s knowledge, it may be
proper, to show his universal learning, that He minutely point out from
whence every metaphor and allusion is taken.

CANON XXI. It will be proper, in order to show his wit, especially if
the Critic be a married man, to take every opportunity of sneering at
the fair sex.

CANON XXII. He may mis-quote himself, or anybody else, in order to make
an occasion of writing notes, when he cannot otherwise find one.

CANON XXIII. The Professed Critic, in order to furnish his quota to the
bookseller, may write notes of nothing; that is to say, notes which
either explain things which do not want explanation, or such as do not
explain matters at all, but merely fill up so much paper.

CANON XXIV. He may dispense with truth, in order to give the world a
higher idea of his parts, or the value of his work.

                  _The Canons of Criticism_, first published as a
                      _Supplement to Mr. Warburton’s Edition of
                      Shakespear. Collected from Notes in that
                      Celebrated Work, and proper to be bound up
                      with it._ By the OTHER GENTLEMAN of
                      _Lincoln’s_ Inn.

    Warburton’s edition also elicited _An Attempte to Rescue that
    Auncient English Poet and Play-Wrighte, Maister Willaume
    Shakespere, from the many Errores faulsely charged on him
    by Certaine New-fangled Wittes, by a Gentleman formerly of
    Greys-Inn_. 1749. This small treatise dealt with _The Tempest_
    in a spirit of genuine zeal, but with less controversial
    ability than was displayed by the “Other Gentleman.”


MARK AKENSIDE, 1749

(1721-1770)

“_The Remonstrance of Shakespeare: supposed to have been spoken at the
Theatre Royal, while the French comedians were acting by subscription._
1749.”

    If, yet regardful of your native land,
    Old Shakespeare’s tongue you deign to understand,
    Lo, from the blissful bowers where Heaven rewards
    Instructive sages and unblemish’d bards,
    I come, the ancient founder of the stage,
    Intent to learn, in this discerning age,
    What form of wit your fancies have embrac’d,
    And whither tends your elegance of taste,
    That thus at length our homely toils you spurn,
    That thus to foreign scenes you proudly turn,
    That from my brow the laurel wreath you claim
    To crown the rivals of your country’s fame.
      What though the footsteps of my devious Muse
    The measur’d walks of Grecian art refuse?
    Or though the frankness of my hardy style
    Mock the nice touches of the critic’s file?
    Yet, what my age and climate held to view,
    Impartial I survey’d, and fearless drew.
    And say, ye skilful in the human heart,
    Who know to prize a poet’s noblest part,
    What age, what clime, could e’er an ampler field
    For lofty thought, for daring fancy, yield?
    I saw this England break the shameful bands
    Forg’d for the souls of men by sacred hands:
    I saw each groaning realm her aid implore;
    Her sons the heroes of each warlike shore;
    Her naval standard (the dire Spaniard’s bane)
    Obey’d through all the circuit of the main.
    Then too great Commerce, for a late-found world,
    Against your coast her eager sails unfurl’d:
    New hopes, new passions, thence to bosom fir’d;
    New plans, new arts, the genius thence inspir’d;
    Thence every scene, which private fortune knows,
    In stronger life, with bolder spirit, rose.
      Disgrac’d I this full prospect which I drew?
    My colours languid, or my strokes untrue?
    Have not your sages, warriors, swains, and kings
    Confess’d the living draught of men and things?
    What other bard in any clime appears
    Alike the master of your smiles and tears?
    Yet have I deigned your audience to entice
    With wretched bribes to luxury and vice?
    Or have my various scenes a purpose known
    Which freedom, virtue, glory, might not own?
      Such from the first was my dramatic plan,
    It should be yours to crown what I began:
    And now that England spurns her Gothic chain,
    And equal laws and social science reign,
    I thought, Now surely shall my zealous eyes
    View nobler bards and juster critics rise,
    Intent with learned labour to refine
    The copious ore of Albion’s native mine,
    Our stately Muse more graceful airs to teach,
    And form her tongue to more attractive speech,
    Till rival nations listen at her feet,
    And own her polish’d as they own’d her great.
      But do you thus my favourite hopes fulfil?
    Is France at last the standard of your skill?
    Alas for you! that so betray a mind
    Of art unconscious and to beauty blind.
    Say; does her language your ambition raise,
    Her barren, trivial, unharmonious phrase,
    Which fetters eloquence to scantiest bounds,
    And maims the cadence of poetic sounds?
    Say; does your humble admiration choose
    The gentle prattle of her Comic Muse,
    While wits, plain-dealers, fops, and fools appear,
    Charg’d to say nought but what the king may hear?
    Or rather melt your sympathising hearts,
    Won by her tragic scene’s romantic arts,
    Where old and young declaim on soft desire,
    And heroes never, but for love, expire?
      No. Though the charms of novelty, awhile,
    Perhaps too fondly win your thoughtless smile,
    Yet not for you design’d indulgent fate
    The modes or manners of the Bourbon state.
    And ill your minds my partial judgment reads,
    And many an augury my soul misleads,
    If the fair maids of yonder blooming train
    To their light courtship would an audience deign,
    Or those chaste matrons a Parisian wife
    Choose for the model of domestic life;
    Or if one youth of all that generous band,
    The strength and splendour of their native land,
    Would yield his portion of his country’s fame,
    And quit old freedom’s patrimonial claim,
    With lying smiles oppressions pomp to see,
    And judge of glory by a king’s decree.
      O blest at home with justly-envied laws,
    O long the chiefs of Europe’s general cause,
    Whom Heaven hath chosen at each dangerous hour
    To check the inroads of barbaric power,
    The rights of trampled nations to reclaim,
    And guard the social world from bonds and shame;
    Oh, let not luxury’s fantastic charms
    Thus give the lie to your heroic arms:
    Nor for the ornaments of life embrace
    Dishonest lessons from that vaunting race,
    Whom fate’s dread laws (for, in eternal fate
    Despotic rule was heir to freedom’s hate,)
    Whom in each warlike, each commercial part,
    In civil counsel, and in pleasing art,
    The judge of earth predestin’d for your foes,
    And made it fame and virtue to oppose.

                     _Odes on Several Subjects._ Book II., ode i.
                         _Poetical Works._ Aldine edition, 1835,
                         p. 199.


ROBERT LLOYD, 1751

(1733-1764)

    There stood an ancient mount, yclept Parnass,
      (The fair domain of sacred poesy,)
    Which, with fresh odours ever-blooming, was
      Besprinkled with the dew of Castaly;
    Which now in soothing murmurs whisp’ring glides
      Wat’ring with genial waves the fragrant soil,
    Now rolls adown the mountain’s steepy sides,
      Teaching the vales full beauteously to smile,
      Dame Nature’s handiwork, not form’d by lab’ring toil.

    The Muses fair, these peaceful shades among,
      With skilful fingers sweep the trembling strings;
    The air in silence listens to the song,
      And Time forgets to ply his lazy wings;
    Pale-visag’d Care, with foul unhallow’d feet,
      Attempts the summit of the hill to gain,
    Ne can the hag arrive the blissful seat,
      Her unavailing strength is spent in vain,
      Content sits on the top, and mocks her empty pain.

    Oft Phœbus’ self left his divine abode,
      And here enshrouded in a shady bow’r,
    Regardless of his state, laid by the god,
      And own’d sweet music’s more alluring pow’r.
    On either side was plac’d a peerless wight,
      Whose merit long had fill’d the trump of Fame;
    This, Fancy’s darling child, was Spenser hight,
      Who pip’d full pleasing on the banks of Tame;
      That, no less fam’d than he, and Milton was his name.

      .       .       .       .       .       .       .

    Next Shakespeare sat, irregularly great,
      And in his hand a magic rod did hold,
    Which visionary beings did create,
      And burn the foulest dross to purest gold:
    Whatever spirits rose in earth or air,
      Or bad or good, obey his dread command;
    To his behests these willingly repair,
      Those aw’d by terrors of his magic wand,
      The which not all their pow’rs united might withstand.

    Beside the bard there stood a beauteous maid,
      Whose glittering appearance dimm’d the eyen;
    Her thin-wrought vesture various tints display’d,
      Fancy her name, ysprong of race divine;
    Her mantle wimpled low, her silken hair,
      Which loose adown her well-turn’d shoulders stray’d,
    She made a net to catch the wanton air,
      Whose love-sick breezes all around her play’d,
      And seem’d in whispers soft to court the heav’nly maid.

    And ever and anon she wav’d in air
      A sceptre, fraught with all-creative pow’r:
    She wav’d it round: eftsoons there did appear
      Spirits and witches, forms unknown before:
    Again she lifts her wonder-working wand;
      Eftsoons upon the flow’ry plain were seen
    The gay inhabitants of Fairy-Land,
      And blithe attendants upon Mab their queen
      In mystic circles danc’d along th’ enchanted green.

    On th’ other side stood Nature, goddess fair;
      A matron seem’d she, and of manners staid;
    Beauteous her form, majestic was her air,
      In loose attire of purest white array’d:
    A potent rod she bore, whose pow’r was such
      (As from her darling’s works may well be shown,)
    That often with its soul-enchanting touch,
      She rais’d or joy or caus’d the deep-felt groan,
      And each man’s passions made subservient to her own.

              _The Progress of Envy_, 1751, Stanzas 2-4 and 7-10.


OLIVER GOLDSMITH, 1765

(1728-1774)

The character of old Falstaff, even with all his faults, gives me more
consolation than the most studied efforts of wisdom: I here behold an
agreeable old fellow, forgetting age, and showing me the way to be
young at sixty-five. Sure I am well able to be as merry, though not so
comical, as he. Is it not in my power to have, though not so much wit,
at least as much vivacity?—Age, care, wisdom, reflection, begone!—I
give you to the winds. Let’s have t’other bottle: here’s to the memory
of Shakespeare, Falstaff, and all the merry men of Eastcheap.

Such were the reflections that naturally arose while I sat at the
Boar’s-head tavern, still kept at Eastcheap. Here, by a pleasant fire,
in the very room where old Sir John Falstaff cracked his jokes, in the
very chair which was sometimes honoured by Prince Henry, and sometimes
polluted by his immoral merry companions, I sat and ruminated on the
follies of youth; wished to be young again; but was resolved to make
the best of life while it lasted, and now and then compared past and
present times together.

              “A Reverie at the Boar’s Head Tavern in Eastcheap.”
                  _Collected Essays_, 1765.


GEORGE, LORD LYTTELTON, 1765

(1709-1773)

“_Boileau—Pope._”

BOILEAU

. . . The office of an _editor_ was below you, and your mind was unfit
for the drudgery it requires. Would anybody think of employing a
Raphael to clean an old picture?

POPE

The principal cause of my undertaking that task was zeal for the honour
of Shakespeare: and if you knew all his beauties as well as I, you
would not wonder at this zeal. No other author had ever so copious,
so bold, so _creative_ an imagination, with so perfect a knowledge of
the passions, the humours, and sentiments of mankind. He painted all
characters, from kings down to peasants, with equal truth and equal
force. If human nature were destroyed, and no monument were left of it
except his works, other beings might know _what man was_ from those
writings.

BOILEAU

You say he painted all characters, from kings down to peasants, with
equal truth and equal force. I cannot deny that he did so; but I wish
he had not jumbled those characters together, in the composition of his
pictures, as he has frequently done.

POPE

The strange mixture of tragedy, comedy, and farce in the same
play, nay, sometimes in the same scene, I acknowledge to be quite
inexcusable. But this was the taste of the times when Shakespeare wrote.

BOILEAU

A great genius ought to guide, not servilely follow, the taste of his
contemporaries.

POPE

Consider from how thick a darkness of barbarism the genius of
Shakespeare broke forth! What were the English, and what (let me
ask you) were the French dramatic performances, in the age when he
flourished? The advances he made towards the highest perfection both of
tragedy and comedy are amazing! In the principal points, in the power
of exciting terror and pity, or raising laughter in an audience, none
yet has excelled him, and very few have equalled.

BOILEAU

Do you think he was equal in comedy to Moliere?

POPE

In _comic force_ I do: but in the fine and delicate strokes of satire,
and what is called _genteel comedy_, he was greatly inferior to
that admirable writer. There is nothing in him to compare with the
_Misanthrope_, the _Ecole des Femmes_, or _Tartuffe_.

BOILEAU

This, Mr. Pope, is a great deal for an Englishman to acknowledge.
A veneration for Shakespeare seems to be a part of your national
religion, and the only part in which even your men of sense are
fanatics.

POPE

He who can read Shakespeare, and be cool enough for all the accuracy of
sober criticism, has more of reason than taste.

BOILEAU

I join with you in admiring him as a prodigy of genius, though I find
the most shocking absurdities in his plays; absurdities which no critic
of my nation can pardon.

POPE

We will be satisfied with your feeling the excellence of his beauties.

                _Dialogues of the Dead_, xiv., 4th edition, 1765.
                    XIV. _Boileau—Pope_, pp. 125-128.

    Three editions of _Dialogues of the Dead_ were published
    in 1760. Practically the whole of the passage quoted above
    appeared for the first time in the fourth edition in 1765.


LAURENCE STERNE, 1768

(1713-1768)

“_The Passport—Versailles._”

I could not conceive why the Count de B * * * had gone so abruptly
out of the room, any more than I could conceive why he had put the
Shakespeare into his pocket—_Mysteries which must explain themselves,
are not worth the loss of time which a conjecture about them takes
up_: it was better to read Shakespeare; so, taking up _Much Ado about
Nothing_, I transported myself instantly from the chair I sat in to
Messina in Sicily, and got so busy with Don Pedro and Benedick and
Beatrice, that I thought not of Versailles, the Count, or the Passport.

Sweet pliability of man’s spirit, that can at once surrender itself
to illusions, which cheat expectation and sorrow of their wearied
moments!—long, long since had you numbered out my days, had I not trod
so great a part of them upon this enchanted ground: when my way is too
rough for my feet, or too steep for my strength, I get off it, to some
smooth velvet path which fancy has scattered over with rosebuds of
delights; and, having taken a few turns in it, come back strengthened
and refreshed—When evils press sore upon me, and there is no retreat
from them in this world, then I take a new course—I leave it—and as I
have a clearer idea of the Elysian fields than I have of heaven, I
force myself, like Æneas, into them—I see him meet the pensive shade
of his forsaken Dido—and wish to recognise it—I see the injured spirit
wave her head, and turn off silent from the author of her miseries
and dishonours—I lose the feelings for myself in hers—and in those
affections which were wont to make me mourn for her when I was at
school.

_Surely this is not walking in a vain shadow—nor does man disquiet
himself_ in vain _by it_—he oftener does so in trusting the issue of
his commotions to reason only—I can safely say for myself, I was never
able to conquer any one single bad sensation in my heart so decisively,
as by beating up as fast as I could some kindly and gentle sensation,
to fight it upon its own ground.

When I had got to the end of the third act, the Count de B * * *
entered with my passport in his hand. M. Le Duc de C * * *, said the
Count, is as good a prophet, I dare say, as he is a statesman—_Un homme
qui rit_, said the Duke, _ne sera jamais dangereux_. Had it been for
any one but the King’s jester, added the Count, I could not have got
it these two hours—_Pardonnez moi_, M. Le Compte, said I—I am not the
King’s jester—But you are Yorick?—Yes—_Et vous plaisantez?_—I answered,
Indeed I did jest—but was not paid for it—it was entirely at my own
expense.

We have no jester at court, M. Le Compte, said I—the last we had was
in the licentious reign of Charles II.—since which time our
manners have been so gradually refining, that our court at present is
so full of patriots, who wish for _nothing_ but the honours and wealth
of their country—and our ladies are all so chaste, so spotless, so
good, so devout—there is nothing for a jester to make a jest of—

_Voila un persiflage!_ cried the Count.

                 _Yorick’s Sentimental Journey through France and
                     Italy_, etc., 1768, vol. ii.


ANONYMOUS, 1769

“_The Dramatic Race. A Catch. By a Lover of the Turf._”

    Clear, clear the course—make room—make room, I say!
    Now they are off, and _Jonson_ makes the play.
    I’ll bet the odds—done, sir, with you, and you;
    SHAKESPEARE keeps near him—and he’ll win it too:
    Here’s even money—done for a hundred, done—
    Now, _Jonson!_ now or never—he has won.
    I’ll take my oath, that SHAKESPEARE won the prize,—
    Damme! whoever says he lost it, lies.

                _Shakespeare’s Garland. Being a Collection of New
                    Songs, Ballads, Roundelays, Catches, Glees,
                    Comic Serenatas, etc., performed at the
                    Jubilee at Stratford-upon-Avon_, 1769, p. 16.


ISAAC BICKERSTAFF, 1769

(_d._ 1812?)

“_Queen Mab. A Cantata._”

RECITATIVE

    Not long ago, ’tis said, a proclamation
    Was sent abroad through all the Fairy nation;
    Mab to her loving subjects—A decree,
    At Shakespeare’s tomb to hold a Jubilee.

ACCOMPANIED

    The night was come, and now on Avon’s side
        The pigmy race was seen,
        Attended by their queen,
    On chafers some, and some on crickets ride.
        The queen appear’d from far,
        Mounted in a nut-shell car;
    Six painted lady-birds the carriage drew:
        And now the cavalcade,
        In order due array’d,
            March’d first
            Where erst
        The sacred Mulb’ry grew,
        And there their homage paid.
        Next they sought the holy ground,
            And while
    A thousand glow-worm torches glimmer’d round;
    Thus Good Fellow, the herald of his fame,
    Did from the alabaster height proclaim
        The poet’s titles and his style.

AIR

    SHAKESPEARE, heaven’s most favour’d creature,
    Truest copier of Nature,
        First of the Parnassian train;
    Chiefest fav’rite of the Muses,
    Which soe’er the poet chooses,
        Blest alike in ev’ry strain.
    Life’s great censor, and inspector,
    Fancy’s treasurer, wit’s director,
        Artless, to the shame of art;
    Master of the various passions,
    Leader of all inclinations,
        Sov’reign of the human heart.

RECITATIVE

    Then did the queen an acorn take,
      Fill’d with morn and ev’ning dew,
    Brush’d from ev’ry fragrant brake
      That round the lawns of Stratford grew.

ACCOMPANIED

    “And thus,” said she, “libation do I make
      To our friend and father’s shade:
      ’Twas Shakespeare that the Fairies made;
    And men shall give us honour for his sake.”

AIR

    O happy bard, whose potent skill
    Can give existence where it will!
    Let giant wisdom strive to chase
    From man’s belief the Fairy race;
    Religion stern our pow’r reject,
    Philosophy our tales neglect,
      Only trusting what ’tis seeing;
    Combat us howe’er they list,
    In thy scenes we shall exist,
      Sure as if Nature gave us being.

                _Shakespeare’s Garland. Being a Collection of New
                    Songs, Ballads, Roundelays, Catches, Glees,
                    Comic Serenatas, etc., performed at the
                    Jubilee at Stratford-upon-Avon_, 1769, p. 21.

    This piece was set to music by Dibdin.


ANONYMOUS, 1778

“_Shakespeare’s Bedside, or his Doctors enumerated._”

    Old Shakespeare was sick;—for a doctor he sent;—
      But ’twas long before any one came:
    Yet at length his assistance Nic Rowe did present,
      Sure all men have heard of his name.

    As he found that the Poet had tumbled his bed,
      He smooth’d it as well as he could;
    He gave him an anodyne, comb’d out his head,
      But did his complaint little good.

    Doctor Pope to incision at once did proceed,
      And the Bard for the simples he cut;
    For his regular practice was always to bleed,
      Ere the fees in his pocket he put.

    Next Theobald advanc’d, who at best was a quack,
      And dealt but in old women’s stuff;
    Yet he caus’d the Physician of Twick’nam to pack,
      And the patient grew cheerful enough.

    Next Hanmer, who fees ne’er descended to crave,
      In gloves lily-white did advance;
    To the Poet the gentlest of purges he gave,
      And, for exercise, taught him to dance.

    One Warburton then, though allied to the Church,
      Produc’d his alternative stores;
    But his med’cines the case so oft left in the lurch,
      That Edwards kick’d him out of doors.

    Next Johnson arriv’d to the patient’s relief,
      And ten years he had him in hand;
    But, tir’d of his task, ’tis the general belief,
      He left him before he could stand.

    Now Capell drew near,—not a Quaker more prim,—
      And numbered each hair on his pate;
    By styptics, call’d stops, he contracted each limb,
      And crippled for ever his gait.

    From Gopsall then strutted a formal old goose,
      And he’d cure him by inches, he swore;
    But when the poor Poet had taken one dose,
      He vow’d he would swallow no more.

    But Johnson, determin’d to save him, or kill,
      A second prescription display’d;
    And, that none might find fault with his drop or his pill,
      Fresh doctors he call’d to his aid.

    First Steevens came loaded with black-letter books,
      Of fame more desirous than pelf;
    Such reading, observers might read in his looks,
      As no one e’er read but himself.

    Then Warner, by Plautus and Glossary known,
      And Hawkins, historian of sound;
    Then Warton and Collins together came on,
      For Greek and Potatoes renown’d.

    With songs on his pontificalibus pinn’d,
      Next Percy the great did appear;
    And Farmer, who twice in a pamphlet had sinn’d,
      Brought up his empirical rear.

    “The cooks the more numerous, the worse is the broth,”
      Says a proverb I well can believe;
    And yet to condemn them untried I am loth,
      So at present shall laugh in my sleeve.

                _Gentleman’s Magazine_, 1787, vol. lvii. ii. 912.
                    _Muses’ Mirror_, 1778, i. 90.

    “Edwards,”—the author of _Canons of Criticism_, see p. 281.

    “Capell ... numbered each hair on his pate,”—Edward Capell (see
    p. 107), of whom Dr. Johnson remarked that his abilities “were
    just sufficient to enable him to select the black hairs from
    the white for the use of periwig makers.” He gave most of his
    attention to the production of an accurate text, based on a
    careful collation of the old copies, and he did his work very
    thoroughly.

    “From Gopsall ... a formal old goose,”—Charles Jennens
    (1700-1773), who printed some of Shakespeare’s tragedies,
    and brought upon himself the unmerciful ridicule of George
    Steevens. He lived at Gopsall in Leicestershire.

    “Warner,”—Richard Warner (1713?-1775), the botanist and
    classical scholar. He made extensive collections for an edition
    and for a glossary of Shakespeare. Neither was published.

    “Hawkins,”—Sir John Hawkins (1719-1789), who published _The
    General History of the Science and Practice of Music_, 1776.

    “Warton and Collins,”—Joseph Warton (1722-1800) and William
    Collins (1721-1759) were school-fellows at Winchester, and
    life-long friends.

    “Percy,”—Bishop Percy of _Percy’s Reliques_.

    “Farmer,”—Richard Farmer (1735-1797), author of the _Essay on
    the Learning of Shakespeare_, 1767.


HORACE WALPOLE, EARL OF ORFORD, 1788

(1717-1797)

My histrionic acquaintance spreads. I supped at Lady Dorothy Hotham’s
with Mrs. Siddons, have visited and been visited by her, and have
seen and liked her much, yes, very much, in the passionate scenes in
“Percy”; but I do not admire her in cool declamation, and find her
voice very hollow and defective. I asked her in which part she would
most wish me to see her? She named Portia in the “Merchant of Venice”;
but I begged to be excused. With all my enthusiasm for Shakespeare, it
is one of his plays that I like the least. The story of the caskets is
silly, and, except the character of Shylock, I see nothing beyond the
attainment of a mortal; Euripides, or Racine, or Voltaire might have
written all the rest.

                  Letter to the Countess of Ossory, 15 Jan. 1788.
                      _Letters_, ed. Peter Cunningham, 1859, vol.
                      ix. p. 124.


PAUL WHITEHEAD, 1790

(1710-1774)

    While here to Shakespeare Garrick pays
    His tributary thanks and praise;
    Invokes the animated stone,
    To make the poet’s mind his own;
    That he each character may trace
    With humour, dignity, and grace;
    And mark, unerring mark, to men,
    The rich creation of his pen:
    Preferr’d the prayer—the marble god
    Methinks I see, assenting, nod,
    And, pointing to his laurell’d brow,
    Cry—“Half this wreath to you I owe:
    Lost to the stage, and lost to fame;
    Murder’d my scenes, scarce known my name;
    Sunk in oblivion and disgrace
    Among the common scribbling race,
    Unnotic’d long thy Shakespeare lay,
    To dulness and to time a prey:
    But now I rise, I breathe, I live
    In you—my representative!
    Again the hero’s breast I fire,
    Again the tender sigh inspire;
    Each side, again, with laughter shake,
    And teach the villain-heart to quake;
    All this, my son! again I do—
    I?—No, my son!—’Tis I, and you.”
      While thus the grateful statue speaks,
    A blush o’erspreads the suppliant’s cheeks—
      “What!—Half this wreath, wit’s mighty chief?—
    O grant,” he cries, “one single leaf;
    That far o’erpays his humble merit,
    Who’s but the organ of thy spirit.”
      Phoebus the generous contest heard—
    When thus the god address’d the bard:
    “Here, take this laurel from my brow,
    On him your mortal wreath bestow;—
    Each matchless, each the palm shall bear,
    In heav’n the bard, on earth the play’r.”

                       “Verses dropped in Mr. Garrick’s Temple of
                           Shakespeare.” _Poems and Miscellaneous
                           Compositions_, 1790.

    Garrick had in his garden at Hampton a temple dedicated to
    Shakespeare, containing a statue of the poet by Roubiliac.


WILLIAM COMBE, 1812

(1741-1823)

“_Dr. Syntax in the Pit of Covent Garden Theatre._”

CRITIC.—

    “Oh, what a _Falstaff_! Oh, how fine!
    Oh, ’tis great acting—’tis divine!”

SYNTAX.—

    “His acting’s great—that I can tell ye;
    For all the acting’s in his belly.”

CRITIC.—

    “But, with due def’rence to your joke,
    A truer word I never spoke
    Than when I say—you’ve never been
    The witness of a finer scene.
    Th’ admir’d actor whom you see
    Plays the fat knight most charmingly:
    ’Tis in this part he doth excel;
    _Quin_ never played it half so well.”

SYNTAX.—

    “You ne’er saw Quin the stage adorn:
    He acted ere your sire was born,
    And critics, sir, who liv’d before you,
    Would have disclos’d a different story.
    This play I’ve better acted seen
    In country towns where I have been.
    I do not hesitate to say—
    I’d rather read this very play
    By my own parlour fireside,
    With my poor judgment for my guide,
    Than see the actors of this stage,
    Who make me gape at Shakespeare’s page.
    When I read Falstaff to myself,
    I laugh like any merry elf;
    While my mind feels a cheering glow
    That Shakespeare only can bestow.
    The swaggering words in his defence,
    Which scarce are wit and yet are sense;
    The ribald jest—the quick conceit—
    The boast of many a braggart feat;
    The half-grave questions and replies
    In his high-wrought soliloquies;
    The dubious thought—the pleasant prate,
    Which give no time to love or hate,
    In such succession do they flow,
    From no to yea—from yea to no,
    Have not been to my mind convey’d
    By this pretender to his trade.
    The smile sarcastic, and the leer
    That tells the laughing mock’ry near;
    The warning look, that ere ’tis spoke
    Aptly forbodes the coming joke;
    The air so solemn, yet so sly,
    Shap’d to conceal the ready lie;
    The eyes, with some shrewd meaning bright,
    I surely have not seen to-night:
    Again, I must beg leave to tell ye,
    ’Tis nought of Falstaff but his belly.”

CRITIC.—

    “All this is fine—and may be true;
    But with such truths I’ve nought to do.
    I’m sure, sir, I shall say aright,
    When I report the great delight
    Th’ enraptur’d audience feel to-night;
    It is indeed, with no small sorrow,
    I cannot your opinions borrow
    To fill the columns of to-morrow.
    My light critique will be preferr’d,
    The public always takes my word;
    Nay, the loud plaudits heard around
    Must all your far-fetch’d thoughts confound:
    I truly wonder when I see
    You do not laugh as well as me.”

SYNTAX.—

    “My muscles other ways are drawn:
    I cannot laugh, sir,—while I yawn.”

CRITIC.—

    “But you will own the scenes are fine?”

SYNTAX.—

    “Whate’er the acting, they’re divine,
    And fit for any pantomime.
    Of this it is that I complain;
    These are the tricks which I disdain:
    The painter’s art the play commends;
    On gaudy show success depends:
    The clothes are made in just design;
    They are well character’d and fine.
    The actors now, I think, Heav’n bless ’em,
    Must learn their art from those who dress ’em;
    But give me actors, give me plays,
    On which I could with rapture gaze,
    Tho’ coats and scenes were made of baise:
    For if the scene were highly wrought;
    If actors acted as they ought;
    You would not then be pleased to see
    This heavy mass of frippery.
    Hear Horace, sir, who wrote of plays
    In Ancient Rome’s Augustan days:—
    ‘_Tanto cum strepitu ludi spectantur, et artes,
    Divitiæque peregrinæ: quibus oblitus actor
    Cum stetit in scena, concurrit dextera lævæ.
    Dixit adhuc aliquid? Nil sane. Quid placet ergo?
    Lana Tarentino violas imitata veneno._’”

CRITIC.—

    “Your pardon, sir, but all around me
    There are such noises they confound me:
    And though I full attention paid,
    I scarcely know a word you said.
    To say the truth, I must acknowledge
    ’Tis long since I have quitted college:
    Virgil and Horace are my friends,
    I have them at my fingers’ ends.
    But Grecian lore, I blush to own,
    Is wholly to my mind unknown.
    I therefore must your meaning seek:
    Oblige me, sir, translate your Greek.
    But see, the farce is now begun,
    And you must listen to the fun,
    It sure has robb’d you of your bile;
    For now, methinks, you deign to smile.”

SYNTAX.—

    “The thing is droll, and aptly bent
    To raise a vulgar merriment:
    But Merry-Andrews, seen as such,
    Have often made me laugh as much.
    An actor does but play the fool
    When he forsakes old Shakespeare’s rule,
    And lets his own foul nonsense out,
    To please th’ ill-judging rabble rout:
    But when he _swears_, to furnish laughter,
    The beadle’s whip should follow after.”

           _The Tour of Dr. Syntax in search of the Picturesque._
               1812, Canto XXIV. ll. 173 _sq._

    _Tanto cum strepitu_, etc., Horace, _Epistles_, II. i.
    203-7.


CHARLES LAMB, 1826.

(1775-1834)

Your fair critic in the coach reminds me of a Scotchman who assured me
that he did not see much in Shakespeare. I replied, I dare say _not_.
He felt the equivoke, lookd awkward, and reddish, but soon returnd to
the attack, by saying that he thought Burns was as good as Shakespeare:
I said that I had no doubt he was—to a _Scotchman_. We exchangd no more
words that day.

                 Letter to J. B. Dibdin, June 30, 1826. _Works of
                     Charles and Mary Lamb._ Ed. E. V. Lucas.
                     1903-4. Vol. vii.


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE, 1845

(1804-1864)

The human race had now reached a stage of progress so far beyond what
the wisest and wittiest men of former ages had ever dreamed of, that
it would have been a manifest absurdity to allow the earth to be any
longer encumbered with their poor achievements in the literary line.
Accordingly, a thorough and searching investigation had swept the
booksellers’ shops, hawkers’ stands, public and private libraries, and
even the little bookshelf by the country fireside, and had brought the
world’s entire mass of printed paper, bound or in sheets, to swell
the already mountain-bulk of our illustrious bonfire. Thick, heavy
folios, containing the labours of lexicographers, commentators, and
encyclopedists, were flung in, and, falling among the embers with a
leaden thump, smouldered away to ashes, like rotten wood. The small,
richly-gilt French tomes of the last age, with the hundred volumes of
Voltaire among them, went off in a brilliant shower of sparkles, and
little jets of flame; while the current literature of the same nation
burnt red and blue, and threw an infernal light over the visages of
the spectators, converting them all to the aspect of parti-coloured
fiends. A collection of German stories emitted a scent of brimstone.
The English standard authors made excellent fuel, generally exhibiting
the properties of sound oak logs. Milton’s works, in particular, sent
up a powerful blaze, gradually reddening into a coal, which promised
to endure longer than almost any other material of the pile. From
Shakespeare there gushed a flame of such marvellous splendour, that men
shaded their eyes as against the sun’s meridian glory; nor even when
the works of his own elucidators were flung upon him, did he cease to
flash forth a dazzling radiance beneath the ponderous heap. It is my
belief that he is still blazing as fervidly as ever.

“Could a poet but light a lamp at that glorious flame,” remarked I, “he
might then consume the midnight oil to some good purpose.”

“That is the very thing which modern poets have been too apt to do,
or at least to attempt,” answered a critic. “The chief benefit to be
expected from this conflagration of past literature undoubtedly is,
that writers will henceforth be compelled to light their lamps at the
sun or stars.”

                 _Mosses from an Old Manse_: “Earth’s Holocaust,”
                     ii. 146-7.


WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, 1846

(1775-1864)

“_Shakespeare and Bacon._”

SOUTHEY.—In so wide and untrodden a creation as that of
Shakespeare’s, can we wonder or complain that sometimes we are
bewildered and entangled in the exuberance of fertility? Dry-brained
men upon the continent, the trifling wits of the theatre, accurate
however and expert calculators, tell us that his beauties are balanced
by his faults. The poetical opposition, puffing for popularity, cry
cheerily against them, _his faults are balanced by his beauties_; when,
in reality, all the faults that ever were committed in poetry would be
but as air to earth, if we could weigh them against one single thought
or image, such as almost every scene exhibits in every drama of this
unrivalled genius. Do you hear me with patience?

PORSON.—With more; although at Cambridge we rather discourse
on Bacon, for we know him better. He was immeasurably a less wise man
than Shakespeare, and not a wiser writer: for he knew his fellow-man
only as he saw him in the street and in the Court, which indeed is but
a dirtier street and a narrower; Shakespeare, who also knew him there,
knew him everywhere else, both as he was and as he might be.

SOUTHEY.—There is as great a difference between Shakespeare
and Bacon as between an American forest and a London timber-yard. In
the timber-yard the materials are sawed and squared and set across; in
the forest we have the natural form of the tree, all its growth, all
its branches, all its leaves, all the mosses that grow about it, all
the birds and insects that inhabit it; now deep shadows absorbing the
whole wilderness; now bright bursting glades, with exuberant grass and
flower and fruitage; now untroubled skies; now terrific thunderstorms;
everywhere multiformity, everywhere immensity.

                 “Southey and Porson.” _Imaginary Conversations._
                     _Works_, 1846, i. pp. 12-13.

    This is from the enlarged edition of the _Imaginary
    Conversations_. It does not appear in the original
    Southey-Porson “Conversation” published in 1824.


WILLIAM SCHWENCK GILBERT, 1868

AN UNFORTUNATE LIKENESS

(_b._ 1836)

    I’ve painted Shakespeare all my life,
      “An Infant” (even then at “play”!)
    “A boy” with stage-ambition rife,
      Then “married to Ann Hathaway.”

    “The bard’s first ticket night” (or “ben.”),
      His “First appearance on the stage,”
    His “Call before the curtain”—then
      “Rejoicings when he came of age.”

    The bard play-writing in his room,
      The bard a humble lawyer’s clerk,
    The bard a lawyer—parson—groom—
      The bard deer-stealing, after dark.

    The bard a tradesman—and a Jew—
      The bard a botanist—a beak—
    The bard a skilled musician too—
      A sheriff and a surgeon eke!

    Yet critics say (a friendly stock)
      That, though it’s evident I try,
    Yet even _I_ can barely mock
      The glimmer of his wondrous eye!

    One morning as a work I framed,
      There passed a person, walking hard:
    “My gracious goodness,” I exclaimed,
      “How very like my dear old bard!

    “Oh what a model he would make!”
      I rushed outside—impulsive me!—
    “Forgive the liberty I take,
      But you’re so very”—“Stop!” said he.

    “You needn’t waste your breath or time,—
      I know what you are going to say,—
    That you’re an artist, and that I’m
      Remarkably like Shakespeare. Eh?

    “You wish that I would sit to you?”
      I clasped him madly round the waist,
    And breathlessly replied, “I do!”
      “All right,” said he, “but please make haste.”

    I led him by his hallowed sleeve,
      And worked away at him apace,
    I painted him till dewy eve,—
      There never was a nobler face!

    “Oh sir,” I said, “a fortune grand
      Is yours, by dint of merest chance,—
    To sport _his_ brow at second hand,
      To wear _his_ cast-off countenance!

    “To rub _his_ eyes whene’er they ache—
      To wear _his_ baldness ere you’re old—
      To clean _his_ teeth when you awake—
    To blow _his_ nose when you’ve a cold!”

    His eyeballs glistened in his eyes—
      I sat and watched and smoked my pipe;
    “Bravo!” I said, “I recognise
      The phrensy of your prototype!”

    His scanty hair he wildly tore:
      “That’s right,” said I, “it shows your breed.”
    He danced—he stamped—he wildly swore—
      “Bless me, that’s very fine indeed!”

    “Sir,” said the grand Shakespearean boy
      (Continuing to blaze away),
    “You think my face a source of joy;
      That shows you know not what you say.

    “Forgive these yells and cellar-flaps:
      I’m always thrown in some such state
    When on his face well-meaning chaps
      This wretched man congratulate.

    “For oh! this face—this pointed chin—
      This nose—this brow—these eyeballs too,
    Have always been the origin
      Of all the woes I ever knew!

    “If to the play my way I find,
      To see a grand Shakespearean piece,
    I have no rest, no ease of mind,
      Until the author’s puppets cease.

    “Men nudge each other—thus—and say,
      ‘This certainly is Shakespeare’s son,’
    And merry wags (of course in play)
      Cry ‘Author,’ when the piece is done.

    “In church the people stare at me,
      Their soul the sermon never binds;
    I catch them looking round to see,
      And thoughts of Shakespeare fill their minds.

    “And sculptors, fraught with cunning wile,
      Who find it difficult to crown
    A bust with Brown’s insipid smile
      Or Tomkins’s unmannered frown,

    “Yet boldly make my face their own,
      When (oh, presumption!) they require
    To animate a paving-stone
      With Shakespeare’s intellectual fire.

    “At parties where young ladies gaze,
      And I attempt to speak my joy,
    ‘Hush, pray,’ some lovely creature says,
      ‘The fond illusion don’t destroy!’

    “Whene’er I speak, my soul is wrung
      With these or some such whisperings:
    ‘’Tis pity that a Shakespeare’s tongue
      Should say such un-Shakespearean things!’

    “I should not thus be criticised
      Had I a face of common wont:
    Don’t envy me—now, be advised!”
      And, now I think of it, I don’t!

                              Reprinted from _Fun_, 14 Nov. 1868.

    “The bard a lawyer”—

        “Go with me to a notary: seal me there
         Your single bond.”

                                    _Merchant of Venice_, I. iii.

    “Parson”—

        “And there shall she at friar Laurence’ cell
         Be shriv’d, and married.”

                                      _Romeo and Juliet_, II. iv.

    “Groom”—

        “And give their fasting horses provender.”

                                              _Henry V._, IV. ii.

    “A tradesman”—

        “Let us, like merchants, show our foulest wares.”

                                  _Troilus and Cressida_, I. iii.

    “A Jew”—

        “Then must the Jew be merciful.”

                                     _Merchant of Venice_, IV. i.

    “A botanist”—

              “The spring, the summer,
        The chiding autumn, angry winter, change
        Their wonted liveries.”

                               _Midsummer Night’s Dream_, II. ii.

    “A beak”—

        “In the county of Gloster, justice of the peace, and coram.”

                                  _Merry Wives of Windsor_, I. i.

    “A skilled musician”—

        “What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us?”

                                              _King John_, V. ii.

    “A sheriff”—

        “And I’ll provide his executioner.”

                                          _II Henry VI._, III. i.

    “A surgeon”—

        “The lioness had torn some flesh away,
         Which all this while had bled.”

                                       _As You Like It_, IV. iii.

                                                   W. S. GILBERT.


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, 1872

(1809-1894)

I wonder if anything like this ever happened:—

    Author writing,—

    “_To be, or not to be: that is the question:
     Whether ’tis nobl—_”

    “William, shall we have pudding to-day, or flapjacks?”

    “Flapjacks an it please thee, Anne, or a pudding for that
    matter; or what thou wilt, good woman, so thou come not betwixt
    me and my thought.”

    Exit Mistress Anne, with strongly accented closing of the door,
    and murmurs to the effect: “Ay, marry, ’tis well for thee to
    talk as if thou hadst no stomach to fill. We poor wives must
    swink for our masters, while they sit in their arm-chairs,
    growing as great in the girth through laziness as that
    ill-mannered old fat man, William, hath writ of in his books of
    players’ stuff. One had as well meddle with a porkpen, which
    hath thorns all over him, as try to deal with William when his
    eyes be rolling in that mad way.”

    William—writing once more—after an exclamation in strong
    English of the older pattern,—

    “Whether ’tis nobler—nobler—nobler—

    To do what? O these women! these women! to have puddings or
    flapjacks! Oh!

    “Whether ’tis nobler—in the mind—to suffer
     The slings—and arrows—of—

    Oh! Oh! these women! I’ll e’en step over to the parson’s, and
    have a cup of sack with his reverence, for methinks Master
    Hamlet hath forgot that which was just now on his lips to
    speak.”

              _The Poet at the Breakfast-Table_, 1872, pp. 10-11.


THEODORE WATTS-DUNTON, 1897

“_Shakespeare’s Friend speaks._”

    To sing the nation’s song, or do the deed
    That crowns with richer light the motherland,
    Or lend her strength of arm in hour of need,
    When fangs of foes shine fierce on every hand,
    Is joy to him whose joy is working well—
    Is goal and guerdon too, though never fame
    Should find a thrill of music in his name;
    Yea, goal and guerdon too, though Scorn should aim
    Her arrows at his soul’s high citadel.
    But if the fates withhold the joy from me
    To do the deed that widens England’s day,
    Or join that song of Freedom’s jubilee
    Begun when England started on her way—
    Withhold from me the hero’s glorious power
    To strike with song or sword for her, the mother,
    And give that sacred guerdon to another,
    Him will I hail as my more noble brother—
    Him will I love for his diviner dower.
    Enough for me who have our Shakespeare’s love
    To see a poet win the poet’s goal,
    For Will is he; enough and far above
    All other prizes to make rich my soul.

                 “Christmas at the Mermaid.” _The Coming of Love,
                     and Other Poems_, 1898 [1897].


JUDGE WILLIS, 1902

(_b._ 1835)

“_Examination of Edward Blount, one of the printers and publishers of
the Shakespeare folio of 1623._”

Did you never hear that Shakespeare the actor, whom you knew, had
nothing to do with the pieces published under his name?

I never did.

Did you never hear that the name “Shakespeare,” that is, with the “e”
after the “k,” was assumed to cover and conceal the writings of a very
great, distinguished man?

I never did.

Would you be surprised to hear that Lord Bacon—

The reporter says that as soon as this word escaped from Counsel’s
lips, the whole Court was convulsed with laughter, in which the jury
joined.

To save appearances, the learned Judge retired into his private room,
as he said, in order to fetch his copy of “Venus and Adonis.” His
laughter was heard in the hall.

“We noticed,” says the reporter, “that Mr. Jonson never smiled. He
seemed deeply moved, and exclaimed, ‘What next? And next?’”

On the return of the Judge, the laughter had not quite subsided, and
the usher cried “Order, Order.”

The Judge, on again taking his seat, said to the Counsel for the
defence, “I am sorry, sir, your question should have been so received,
but you must remember the spectators are human, and that the jury and
myself are not free from infirmity. We are, however, quite impartial.”

The Counsel resumed.

Now that this indecent laughter is over, tell me, sir, do you not know
that Lord Bacon was the author of the plays contained in the folio
volume?

I do not know it, and never until now have I heard a doubt cast upon
the authorship of Shakespeare.

Did you never have any communication from Lord Bacon in respect of the
publishing the folio volume?

Never. I never received a paper of any kind from him, nor did I
communicate any portion of the manuscript to him.

Did not Mr. Benjamin Jonson bring you the manuscripts, or some of them,
from which you printed?

“My lord, my lord!” said Jonson.

“Pray be quiet, Mr. Jonson, you will have your turn directly,” said the
Judge.

He did not, nor did he touch any sheet of them. As I have told you, I
never communicated with him until I spoke to him about writing some
lines for the portrait.

Did not Mr. Jonson write the Dedication or Preface?

He wrote neither. Heminge and Condell wrote the Dedication, and the
Address to the Readers they composed in consultation with myself.

Did you not receive money from some one in order to induce you to print
the folio?

I did not. I looked to the sale, and the sale only, to recoup myself
and my co-adventurers.

_Re-examined._—I myself never touched the manuscripts, nor added a line
to them. After they were in my possession, Heminge and Condell never,
to my knowledge, altered the manuscripts, nor did any one else.

I could, if necessary, have written a Dedication and the Address to the
Readers. I wrote a work entitled “A Hospital for Incurable Fools.” I
hope some day such hospital will be founded.

                  _The Shakespeare-Bacon Controversy; A Report of
                      The Trial of an Issue in Westminster Hall,
                      20 June 1627. Read in the Inner Temple
                      Hall, Thursday, May the 29th, 1902_, by
                      William Willis, Treasurer of the Honourable
                      Society of the Inner Temple, pp. 15-16.

    This extract is taken from an account of an imaginary suit in
    connection with the administration of Shakespeare’s estate,
    to determine whether the testator was the author of the plays
    published under the name of William Shakespeare in the folio
    volume of 1623.

           *       *       *       *       *

    The _Dictionary of National Biography_ states that Edward
    Blount (_fl._ 1588-1632), the stationer, has been credited
    on doubtful grounds with the authorship of the very curious
    _Hospitall of Incvrable Fooles: Erected in English, as neer the
    first Italian Modell and platforme as the vnskilful hand of an
    ignorant Architect could deuise. Printed by Edm. Bollifant for
    Edward Blount_, 1600.


_TO MY VERY GOOD FRIEND, MR. WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE_

    _It’s not because I know that you
      Are really what the World has found you,
    That I collect and tell anew
      The tributes that have gathered round you.
    Not moved to tread the lofty ways
      Of those great souls who turned their powers,
    As duty-bounden, to your praise,
      Weave I this little wreath of flowers._

    _You have, I know, a “myriad mind,”
      A “honey tongue” to tell a story;
    You left poor “panting Time” behind,
      (See Johnson) in the race for glory—
    ’Tis true. But when all’s said and done,
      With thought and rhetoric impassioned,
    You’ve been, and are, a Friend to one
      Whose mind is not supremely fashioned._




INDEX


    Addison, Joseph. _Cato_, 18, 23.
      Compared with Shakespeare, 18.
      His contemporary fame, 22.
      _Lines_ to. By William Somervile, and by John Hughes, 23.
      _The Spectator_ (No. 45), 278;
        (No. 592), 84.
      Voltaire’s opinion of, 18.

    Akenside, Mark. _An Inscription_, 105.
      _The Remonstrance of Shakespeare_, 284.

    _Among My Books._ By James Russell Lowell, 174, 266.

    _Appreciations, with an Essay on Style._ By Walter Pater, 193.

    _Argalus and Parthenia._ By Francis Quarles. Possible allusion
        to Shakespeare in, 5 _n._

    Armstrong, John. _Of the Versification of English Tragedy_, 100.
      _Of the Dramatic Unities_, 100.

    Arnold, Matthew. _Essays in Criticism_, 195.
      _Heine’s Grave_, 265.
      His Sonnet on Shakespeare, 29, 169.
      His edition of Wordsworth’s _Poems_, 195.

    _Art of English Poetry._ By Edward Bysshe, 26 _n._

    _At the Mermaid._ By Robert Browning, 31.

    _Autumn Vision, An._ By A. C. Swinburne, 201.


    B., A. _Covent Garden Drollery_, 69.

    _Bab Ballads._ By W. S. Gilbert, 318.

    Bacon, Francis, Lord Verulam, 145.
      Compared with Shakespeare, 168, 316.
      His supposed authorship of Shakespeare’s _Works_, v, 326.

    Bancroft, Thomas. _To Shakespeare_, from _Two Bookes of
        Epigrammes and Epitaphs_, 57.

    Barnfield, Richard. _A Remembrance of some English Poets_, from
        _Poems in Divers Humors_, 36.

    Basse, William. _On Mr. William Shakespeare_, 40.

    _Battaile of Agincourt, The._ By Michael Drayton, 48.

    Baynes, Thomas Spencer. Article on “Shakespeare” in
        _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 207.

    Beaumont, Francis, 40, 42, 80.

    Beddoes, T. L. _Lines written in Switzerland_, 258.

    Betterton, Thomas, seen by Samuel Pepys as Macbeth, 63.

    Bickerstaff, Isaac. _Queen Mab_, 299.

    _Biographia Literaria._ By S. T. Coleridge, 130, 232.

    Blackmore, Sir Richard. His _Creation_, Johnson’s criticism of, 21.

    Blind, Mathilde. _Shakespeare_, from _Shakespeare Sonnets_, 213.

    Blount, Edward, 326-8.

    _Blue-stocking Revels._ By Leigh Hunt, 247.

    Boileau and Pope, 292.

    Boston, Shakespeare Jubilee at, 1824. Prize Ode by Charles Sprague,
        142.

    Boswell, James, the elder. _Life of Dr. Johnson_, 94, 107.

    Boswell, James, the younger. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_,
        20.

    Bowle, John. _Miscellaneous Pieces of Ancient English Poetry_, 26
        _n._

    Bowles, William Lisle. _Monody on the Death of Dr. Warton_, 228.
      _On Shakespeare_, from _Sonnets, with other Poems_, 124.

    Boydell’s Shakespeare Gallery, 148.

    Braybrooke, Lord. Samuel Pepys’ _Diary and Correspondence_, 62.

    Brooke, Stopford A. _Life and Letters of Frederick William
        Robertson_, 164.

    Browne, Felicia Dorothea, afterwards Mrs. Hemans. _England and
        Spain_, 229.
      _Shakespeare_, 128.

    Browning, Elizabeth Barrett. _A Vision of Poets_, 252.

    Browning, Robert. _At the Mermaid_, 31.
      _Christmas Eve and Christmas Day_, 255.
      _The Names_, 204.

    Burlington, Lord, 225.

    Butler, Samuel. _The Court Burlesqu’d._ Possible allusion to
        Shakespeare in, 5.

    Byron, Lord. Letter to Murray, 239.

    Bysshe, Edward. _Art of English Poetry_, 26 _n._


    _Caius Marius, a Tragedy._ Otway’s _Prologue_ to, 72.

    _Canons of Criticism._ By Thomas Edwards, 281, 303, 304 _n._

    Capell, Edward. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 20, 107, 303,
        304 _n._
      Johnson’s criticism of, 304 _n._

    _Caractacus._ By William Mason, 101.

    Carlyle, Thomas. _Chartism_, 249.
      _Critical and Miscellaneous Essays_, 242, 249.
      _Essay on Corn Law Rhymes_ in _Edinburgh Review_, 158.
      _Goethe_, 242.
      _The Hero as Poet_, from _On Heroes and Hero Worship_, 157.
      _Shooting Niagara: and After?_ 264.

    _Catalogue of Printed Books collected by Frederick Locker-Lampson_,
        198.

    _Characteristics of English Poets._ By William Minto, 189.

    _Charge to the Poets, A._ By William Whitehead, 109.

    Charles I. His influence on literature, 12.
      His knowledge of Shakespeare, 7.

    Charles II. His influence on literature, 12.

    _Chartism._ By Thomas Carlyle, 249.

    Chaucer, Geoffrey, 40, 42.

    _Christmas at the Mermaid._ By Theodore Watts-Dunton, 325.

    _Christmas Eve and Christmas Day._ By Robert Browning, 255.

    Churchill, Charles. _The Rosciad_, 108.

    _Citation and Examination of William Shakespeare._ By W. S. Landor,
        30.

    Coleridge, Hartley. _To Shakespeare_, 148.

    Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, ix.
      His achievement as an æsthetic critic, 28.
      _Biographia Literaria_, 130, 232.
      His general dislike of “Selections,” 131.
      His influence on the poetry of the nineteenth century, 27.
      _Letters_, 246.
      _Literary Remains_, 28, 131.
      His notes on _The Tempest_, 132 _n._
      _Outline of an Introductory Lecture on Shakespeare_, 232.
      _Seven Lectures on Shakespeare and Milton_, 232.
      _Table Talk_, 240, 243, 246.

    Collier, John Payne, 162.

    Collins, William. _Verses_ addressed to Sir Thomas Hanmer, 92.

    Colman, George, 224.
      _Prose on several Occasions_, 224.
      His translation of Terence, 224.

    Combe, William. _The Tour of Dr. Syntax in Search of the
        Picturesque_, 308.

    _Coming of Love, The._ By Theodore Watts-Dunton, 325.

    Condell, Henrie, and John Heminge. _To the Great Variety of
        Readers_, from the Shakespeare First Folio, 46.

    _Conduct of Life._ By Ralph Waldo Emerson, 251.

    Congreve, William, 12, 114.

    _Conjectures on Original Composition._ By Edward Young, 104, 224.

    _Connoisseur, The._ Its attitude towards Shakespeare, 21.

    Cook, A. S. Leigh Hunt’s _Imagination and Fancy_, 250.

    _Court Burlesqu’d, The._ By Samuel Butler. Possible allusion to
        Shakespeare in, 5 _n._

    _Covent Garden Drollery._ Collected by A. B., 69.

    Covent Garden Theatre, Dr. Syntax in the pit of, 308.

    _Creation, The._ By Sir Richard Blackmore, 21.

    Crowne, John. _Prologue_ to _Henry the Sixth_, 220.

    Cunningham, Peter. _Letters_ of Horace Walpole, 99, 226, 305.

    _Cymbeline_, 148.


    Daniel, George. _Vindication of Poesie_, 58.

    D’Avenant, Sir William, 53.
      His adaptations of Shakespeare’s Plays, 10.
      _Ode. In Remembrance of Master William Shakespeare_, from
          _Madagascar_, 54.
      His version of _The Tempest_, 67.

    Davies, John. “_To our English Terence, Mr. Will Shakespeare_,” from
        _The Scourge of Folly_, 38.

    Dennis, John. _An Essay on the Genius and Writings of Shakespeare_,
        82.

    De Quincey, Thomas. His article on “Pope” in the _Encyclopædia
        Britannica_, 248.
      His article on “Shakespeare” in the _Encyclopædia Britannica_,
          150, 248.
      His criticism of Pope’s _Preface_, 87 _n._
      His misinterpretation of the allusion to Shakespeare in Milton’s
          _Eikonoklastes_, 8.
      On the knocking at the gate in _Macbeth_, 30, 152 _n._
      _Schlosser’s Literary History_, 254.

    _Dialogues of the Dead._ By Lord Lyttelton, 292.

    _Diary and Correspondence_ of Samuel Pepys, 62.

    Dibdin, J. B. Letter to, from Charles Lamb, 313.

    Digges, Leonard. _To the Memory of the deceased Author, Maister W.
        Shakespeare_: from the Shakespeare First Folio, 47.

    Dodsley, J. His _Collection of Poems by Several Hands_, 26 _n._,
        123.

    Dowden, Edward. _Shakespeare, his Mind and Art_, 28, 190, 267.

    _Dramatic Poesie, An Essay._ By John Dryden, 67.

    _Dramatic Poetry, An Essay on._ By a Person of Honour, 74.

    _Dramatic Race, The_, 298.

    _Dramatic Unities, Of the._ By John Armstrong, 100.

    Drayton, Michael. _To my most dearly-beloved friend Henery
        Reynolds_, from _The Battaile of Agincourt_, 48.

    Dryden, John, 3, 10, 114.
      His contemporary fame, 22.
      _Defence of the Epilogue_, 68.
      The first skilled critic of Shakespeare, 11.
      His influence on eighteenth century literature, 13.
      _Of Dramatic Poesie_, 66.
      _Prologue_ to _The Tempest_, 66.
      _Prologue_ to _Troilus and Cressida_, 67.

    Dyce, Alexander, 162.

    Dyer, George. _Poetics_, 231.


    _Earth’s Holocaust._ By Nathaniel Hawthorne, 314.

    _Edinburgh Review._ Article by Carlyle in, 158.
      Articles by Jeffrey in, 133, 230.
      Articles by Macaulay in, 160, 245.

    Edwards, Thomas, 303, 304 _n._
      _Canons of Criticism_, 281.

    _Edwin and Emma._ By David Mallet, 24.

    _Eikonoklastes._ By John Milton. Allusion to Shakespeare in, 7.

    _Elegie on the Death of the famous Writer and Actor, Mr. William
        Shakespeare_, from Shakespeare’s _Poems_, 55.

    Emerson, Ralph Waldo. _Conduct of Life_, 262.
      _Representative Men_, 162, 251.
      _Shakespeare, or the Poet_, 162.

    _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 150, 208, 248.

    _England and Spain._ By Felicia Dorothea Hemans, 229.

    _Enthusiast, The._ By Joseph Warton, 91.

    _Epigrammes and Epitaphs._ By Thomas Bancroft, 57.

    _Epigrammes in the Oldest Cut and Newest Fashion._ By John Weever,
        37.

    _Epigrams._ By Samuel Sheppard, 59.

    _Epigrams of Art, Life, and Nature._ By William Watson, 270.

    _Epitaph_ on a Tombstone of Shakespeare, 223.

    _Essays, Critical and Imaginative._ By John Wilson, 140.

    _Essays in Criticism._ By Matthew Arnold, 195.

    _Euphrosyne._ By Richard Graves, 225.


    Falstaff, 308.

    Farmer, Richard, 304 and _n._
      _Essay on the Learning of Shakespeare_, 224.

    _Fennell’s Shakespeare Repository_, 40.

    Fenton, Elijah. _An Epistle to Mr. Southerne_, 80.

    _Ferney: An Epistle to Monsr. De Voltaire._ By George Keate, 112.

    Fielding, Henry. _A Journey from this World to the Next_, 279.

    First Folio Edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 6, 42, 45, 46, 47.

    _Five Books of Song._ By Richard Watson Gilder, 212.

    Fletcher, John, compared with Shakespeare, 66, 80, 92.
      His “solecism of speech,” 68.

    Forman, H. Buxton. _Works_ of John Keats, 138.

    _Fors Clavigera._ By John Ruskin, 273.

    Freeman, Thomas. _To Master W. Shakespeare_, from _Runne, and a
        Great Caste_, 39.

    Froude, James Anthony. _Short Studies on Great Subjects_, 167.

    Fuller, Thomas. _The History of the Worthies of England_, 61.

    Furnivall, Dr. Frederick James. _The Leopold Shakspere_, 192.
      _Some 300 Fresh Allusions to Shakspere from 1594 to 1694_, viii,
          5.

    Fuseli, John Henry, 148.


    _Garden Inscriptions._ By William Thomson, 110.

    Garrick, David, 144.
      His criticism of Johnson’s praise of Shakespeare, 94.
      _Epistle_ to. By Robert Lloyd, 106.
      Shakespeare’s debt to, 106.
      His connection with the Shakespeare Jubilee at Stratford-on-Avon,
          25.
      His Shakespeare temple at Hampton, 26, 306-7.
      Verses addressed to, 25.
      _Warwickshire: A Song_, from _Shakespeare’s Garland_, 113.

    Gastrell, Rev. Dr. F., and Shakespeare’s mulberry tree, 10, 185.

    _Genius and Writings on Shakespeare, An Essay on the._ By John
        Dennis, 82.

    _Genius of Shakespeare, To the._ By James Hogg, 146.

    _Gentleman’s Magazine_, 223, 301.

    Gilbert, William Schwenck. _An Unfortunate Likeness_, from _More Bab
        Ballads_, 318.

    Gilder, Richard Watson. _The Twenty-third of April_, from _Five
        Books of Song_, 212.

    Goethe, Carlyle’s Essay on, 242.
      Compared with Shakespeare, 158, 159.

    _Goethe reviewed after Sixty Years._ By J. R. Seeley, 272.

    Goldsmith, Oliver. _A Reverie at the Boar’s Head Inn_, 291.

    Graves, Richard. _On Erecting a Monument to Shakespeare_, from
        _Euphrosyne_, 225.

    Gray, Thomas. _The Progress of Poesy_, 102.

    _Guardian, The._ Its attitude towards Shakespeare, 20.

    _Guesses at Truth._ By Julius Charles Hare, 145.


    Hales, John. Quoted in Rowe’s edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 53.

    Hallam, Henry. _Introduction to the Literature of Europe in the
        Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Seventeenth Centuries_, 155.

    Hamilton, William. _A Soliloquy in Imitation of Hamlet_, 24.

    _Hamlet_, 323.
      Early æsthetic criticism of, 27.

    Hanmer, Sir Thomas. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 16, 93.
      Verses addressed to. By William Collins, 92.

    Hare, Julius Charles. _Guesses at Truth_, 145.

    Hawkins, Sir John, 303, 304 _n._

    Hawthorne, Nathaniel. _Earth’s Holocaust_, from _Mosses from an Old
        Manse_, 314.
      _Our Old Home_, 175.
      On visiting Shakespeare’s house, 175.

    Hayley, William. _A Poetical Epistle to an Eminent Painter_ [_George
        Romney_], 120.

    Hazlitt, William, ix, 28.
      _Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays_, Jeffrey’s review of, 134.
      _On Dryden and Pope_, 136.
      _Lectures on the English Poets_, 135-7, 189, 234.
      _Round Table, The_, 137.
      _On Shakespeare and Milton_, 135, 234.
      _Table Talk_, 237.

    Headley, Henry. _Select Beauties of Ancient English Poetry_, 26 _n._

    _Heine’s Grave._ By Matthew Arnold, 265.

    Hemans, Felicia Dorothea. _England and Spain_, 229.
      _Shakespeare_, 128.

    Heminge, John, and Henrie Condell. _To the great Variety of
        Readers_, from the Shakespeare First Folio, 46.

    _Henry V._ Performance of, witnessed by Samuel Pepys, 62.

    _Henry VI., part I._ John Crowne’s adaptation of, 220.

    _Heroes and Hero Worship, On._ By Thomas Carlyle, 157.

    Higden, Henry. _The Wary Widdow, or Sir Noisy Parrat_, 75.

    _History of England._ By David Hume, 97.

    Hogg, James. _To the Genius of Shakespeare_, from _Songs by the
        Ettrick Shepherd_, 146.

    Holland, Hugh. _Upon the Lines and Life of the Famous Scenick Poet,
        Master William Shakespeare_, from the Shakespeare First Folio,
        45.

    Holmes, Oliver Wendell. _The Poet at the Breakfast Table_, 323.
      _Shakespeare Tercentennial Celebration_, from _Songs of Many
          Seasons_, 177.

    Hood, Thomas. _The Plea of the Midsummer Fairies_, 241.

    _Hospitall of Incurable Fooles_, 328 and _n._

    Hughes, John. _Verses to Mr. Addison_, 23.

    Hugo, Victor. _Shakespeare_, 10, 28.
      On Shakespeare’s posthumous fame, 10.

    Hume, David. _History of England_, 97.

    Hunt, Leigh. _Associations with Shakespeare_ from _Table Talk_, 166.
      _Blue-Stocking Revels_, 247.
      _Thoughts on the Avon_, 233.
      _What is Poetry?_ from _Imagination and Fancy_, 250.

    _Hymn to the Moon._ By D. M. Moir, 257.

    _Hymn to the Nymph of Bristol._ By William Whitehead, 24.


    _Idea of a University, The._ By John Henry Newman, 171.

    _Idea of Comedy, On the._ By George Meredith, 191.

    _Imaginary Conversations._ By Walter Savage Landor, 253, 316.

    _Imagination and Fancy._ By Leigh Hunt, 247.

    _Imitations of Horace._ By Alexander Pope, 221.

    _Immortal Memory of Shakespeare, To the_, 116.

    I. M. S. _On Worthy Master Shakespeare and his Poems_, from the
        Shakespeare Second Folio, 50.
      Coleridge’s conjecture as to the identity of, 7, 52 _n._

    Ingleby, Dr. _Shakespeare’s Centurie of Prayse_, vii, 4.

    _Inscription, An._ By Mark Akenside, 105.

    _In Shakespeare’s Walk._ By William Thompson, 110.

    _Introduction to the Literature of Europe in the Fifteenth,
        Sixteenth, and Seventeenth Centuries._ _By Henry Hallam_, 155.


    James I. His influence on literature, 12, 13.

    Jeffrey, Francis, Lord, 230.
      His article on Hazlitt’s _Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays_ in
          the _Edinburgh Review_, 133.

    Jennens, Charles, 303, 304 _n._

    Johnson, Dr. Samuel, his attitude towards Shakespeare, 16.
      His criticism of Capell’s _Preface_, 107.
      His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 17-18, 111.
      His edition of _British Poets_, 21-22.
      The effect of his judgment on contemporary thought, 19-20.
      His indictment and defence of Shakespeare, 17-18.
      His connection with the Shakespeare Jubilee at Stratford-on-Avon,
          25.
      His _Life_. By James Boswell, 94, 107.
      His position as a literary censor, 14.
      His _Prologue_ at the opening of Drury Lane Theatre, 1747, 94.
      _The Rambler_, 111.

    Jonson, Ben, 74.
      Compared with Shakespeare, 15, 53, 66, 69, 80, 92, 98, 104.
      _To the Memory of My Beloved, the Author_, from the Shakespeare
          First Folio, 42.

    Johnstone, ——. _The Table Talker_, 156.

    _Journey from this World to the Next, A._ By Henry Fielding, 279.


    Keate, George, _Ferney: an Epistle to Monsr. De Voltaire_, 112.

    Keats, John. Letter to George and Georgiana Keats, 236.
      _Notes on Troilus and Cressida_, 138.
      _Sonnet on sitting down to read “King Lear” once again_, 138.

    Kemble, Frances Anne. _To Shakespeare_, 183.

    Kid, Thomas, 43.

    _King Lear_, 145, 148, 214.
      Nahum Tate’s “borrowings” from, 10.
      Sonnet on sitting down to read it once again. By John Keats, 138.

    Knight, Charles. His history of opinion respecting Shakespeare, vii.
      _Studies of Shakespeare_, vii.


    Lamb, Charles, ix.
      Epilogue to an amateur performance of “Richard II.,” 144.
      Letter to J. B. Dibdin, 313.
      Letter to Samuel Rogers on portraits of Shakespeare, 148.
      _Works._ Edited by E. V. Lucas, 144, 148, 313.

    Landor, Walter Savage.
      _Citation and Examination_ of William Shakespeare, 30.
      _Imaginary Conversations_, 253, 316.
      _On Shakespeare_, 253.
      Comparison between Shakespeare and Bacon, 316.
      _Shakespeare and Milton_, from _The lost Fruit off an old Tree_,
          170.

    Lansdowne, Lord, _Epistle_ to. By Edward Young, 83.

    _Learning of Shakespeare, Essay on the._ By Richard Farmer, 224.

    _Lectures on the English Poets._ By William Hazlitt, 135-7.

    Lee, Sidney, and the Shakespeare-Bacon controversy, v.
      _Life of William Shakespeare_, 215.
      _Shakespeare in Oral Tradition_, 5.

    _Leopold Shakspere, The._ Edited by F. J. Furnivall, 192.

    _Library of Old Authors._ By James Russell Lowell, 173.

    Lily, William, 43.

    Lincoln, Abraham, 261.

    _Lines written among the Euganean Hills._ By P. B. Shelley, 235.

    _Lines written in Switzerland._ By T. L. Beddoes, 258.

    _Literary Amusements._ By Daniel Webb, 227.

    Lloyd, David. _State Worthies_, 13.

    Lloyd, Robert. _The Progress of Envy_, 288.
      _Shakespeare, an Epistle to Mr. Garrick_, 25, 106.

    Locker-Lampson, Frederick. His copy of the 1602 Quarto of _The Merry
        Wives of Windsor_, 198.

    _London Cuckolds, The._ By Edward Ravenscroft. A performance of,
        criticised by Steele, 76.

    _Lost Fruit off an old Tree, The._ By Walter Savage Landor, 170.

    _Love’s Labour’s Lost_, 194.
      Dryden’s criticism of, 68.

    Lowell, James Russell. _Among My Books_, 174, 266.
      _Library of Old Authors_, 173.
      On Shakespeare’s “artistic discretion” and the “impersonality” of
          his writings, 174.

    Lucas, E. V. _Works of Charles and Mary Lamb_, 144, 148, 313.

    _Lusiad, The._ By William Julius Mickle, 119.

    _Lyrical Ballads._ By Wordsworth and Coleridge, 27.

    Lyttelton, George, Lord. _Dialogues of the Dead_, 292.

    Lytton, Edward Bulwer, Lord. _The Souls of Books_, 259.


    Macaulay, Thomas Babington, Lord, 295.
      Essay on _The Diary and Letters of Madame D’Arblay_ in the
          _Edinburgh Review_, 160.

    _Macbeth_, 145.
      D’Avenant’s adaptation of, 10.
      De Quincey on the knocking at the gate in, 30.
      Performance of, described by Addison, 278.
      Performances of, witnessed by Samuel Pepys, 62, 63.

    Mackay, Charles. _Mist_, from _Under Green Leaves_, 260.

    _Madagascar._ By Sir William D’Avenant, 54.

    Malone, Edmund. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 20.

    Mallet, David. _Edwin and Emma_, 24.
      _Of Verbal Criticism_, 103.

    Mann, Sir Horace. Letter to, from Horace Walpole, 226.

    Marlowe, Christopher, 43.

    Mason, William. _Caractacus_, 101.

    Massey, Gerald. _The Secret Drama of Shakespeare’s Sonnets_, 209.

    Masson, David. _Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and other Essays_, 168.

    _Merchant of Venice, The._ The _Connoisseur’s_ criticism of, 20.

    Meredith, George. _On the Idea of Comedy_, 191.
      _The Spirit of Shakespeare_, from _Poems and Lyrics of the Joy of
          Earth_, 202.

    Meres, Francis. _Palladis Tamia_, 35.

    _Merry Wives of Windsor._ Manuscript note in 1602 Quarto of, 189.

    Mickle, William Julius. _The Lusiad_, 119.

    _Midsummer Night’s Dream._ Performance of, witnessed by Samuel
        Pepys, 62.

    _Mighty Makers, The._ By William Wetmore Story, 205.

    Milnes, Richard Monckton. _Life, Letters, and Literary Remains of
        John Keats_, 138.

    Milton, John, 127.
      Compared with Shakespeare, 131, 170.
      Credited with authorship of verses signed I. M. S., 52.
      _Eikonoklastes_, 7, 9.
      _An Epitaph on the Admirable Dramatic Poet, W. Shakespeare_, from
          the Shakespeare Second Folio, 49.
      _L’Allegro_, 9.
      Mistaken conception of his attitude towards Shakespeare, 7-10.
      His tributes to Shakespeare, 9-10.

    Minto, William. _Characteristics of English Poets_, 189.

    _Miscellaneous Pieces of Ancient English Poetry._ Collected by John
        Bowle, 26 _n._

    Moir, D. M. _Hymn to the Moon_, 257.
      _Stanzas on an Infant_, 257.

    _Monody written near Stratford-upon-Avon._ By Thomas Warton, 121.

    Montagu, George. Letter to, from Horace Walpole, 99.

    Moore, Thomas. _Life of Byron_, 239.

    _Mosses from an Old Manse._ By Nathaniel Hawthorne, 314.

    Moulton, G. _Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist_, 271.

    _Much Ado About Nothing_, 295.

    _Mystery of Life and its Arts, The._ By John Ruskin, 184.


    _Names, The._ By Robert Browning, 204.

    Newcastle, Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of. _CCXI Sociable Letters_,
        64, 277.

    Newman, John Henry. _The Idea of a University_, 171.

    _New Shakspere Society_, 4.

    Northcote, James, 148.


    Opie, John, 148.

    Ossory, Countess of. Letter to, from Horace Walpole, 305.

    _Othello_, Disputed line in, 279.
      Christopher Smart’s _Prologue_ to, 96.

    Otway, Thomas, 114.
      _Prologue_ to _The History and Fall of Caius Marius_, 72.

    _Our Old Home._ By Nathaniel Hawthorne, 175.


    Palgrave, Francis Turner. _Songs and Sonnets of William
        Shakespeare_, 181.

    _Palladis Tamia._ By Francis Meres, 35.

    Pater, Walter Horatio. _Appreciations, with an Essay on Style_, 193.

    Pattison, William. His verses _To Mr. John Saunders_, 23.

    Pearch, G. His _Supplement_ to Dodsley’s _Collection of Poems by
        Several Hands_, 26 _n._

    Pepys, Samuel. _Diary and Correspondence_, edited by Lord
        Braybrooke, 62.

    Percy, Bishop, 304 and _n._

    _Pericles._ Dryden’s criticism of, 68.

    Phillips, Edward. _Theatrum Poetarum_, 10, 71.

    _Philosophical Analysis of some of Shakespeare’s Remarkable
        Characters._ By William Richardson, 117.

    _Plea of the Midsummer Fairies, The._ By Thomas Hood, 241.

    _Poems and Lyrics of the Joy of Earth._ By George Meredith, 202.

    _Poems by Several Hands._ Collected by J. Dodsley, 26 _n._
      Pearch’s _Supplement_ to, 26 _n._

    _Poems Collected and Arranged anew._ By Archbishop Trench, 180.

    _Poems in Divers Humors._ By Richard Barnfield, 36.

    _Poems on Various Subjects._ Collected by Thomas Tomkins, 26 _n._

    _Poet at the Breakfast Table, The._ By Oliver Wendell Holmes, 323.

    _Poetical Portraits._ By “A Modern Pythagorean,” 244.

    _Poetics._ By George Dyer, 231.

    Pope, Alexander, 225.
      And Boileau, 292.
      His contemporary fame, 22.
      His criticism and defence of Shakespeare, 14-16.
      De Quincey’s criticism of, 87 _n._
      His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 15, 16, 85, 292.
      _Imitations of Horace_, 221.
      On Shakespeare’s learning, 15.

    Porson, Richard, and Robert Southey. Imaginary conversation. By
        W. S. Landor, 316.

    Porter, Endymion, 53.

    _Progress of Envy, The._ By Robert Lloyd, 288.

    _Progress of Poesy, The._ By Thomas Gray, 102.

    _Prose on Several Occasions._ By George Colman, 224.


    Quarles, Francis. _Argalus and Parthenia_, 5 _n._

    _Queen Mab._ By Isaac Bickerstaff, 299.

    Quin, James, 308.


    _Rambler, The._ By Dr. Johnson, 111.

    _Rape of Lucrece._ Edward Phillips’ criticism of, 71.

    Raphael. His picture, _The Transfiguration_, 112.

    Ravenscroft, Edward. _The London Cuckolds_, A performance of,
        criticised by Steele, 76.

    _Reflector, The_, 231.

    _Remonstrance of Shakespeare, The._ By Mark Akenside, 284.

    _Representative Men._ By Ralph Waldo Emerson, 162, 251.

    Restoration adaptations of Shakespeare’s plays, 10-12.

    _Reverie at the Boar’s Head Inn, A._ By Oliver Goldsmith, 291.

    Reynolds, Sir Joshua, 148.

    Richardson, William. _A Philosophical Analysis and Illustration of
        some of Shakespeare’s remarkable characters_, 117.

    Robertson, Frederick William. _Life and Letters_, edited by Stopford
        A. Brooke, 164.

    Rogers, Samuel. Letter to, from Charles Lamb, 148.

    _Romeo and Juliet_, 145, 148.
      Performance of, witnessed by Samuel Pepys, 62.

    Romney, George, 148.
      _Poetical Epistle_ to. By William Hayley, 120.

    _Rosciad, The._ By Charles Churchill, 108.

    Rossetti, Dante Gabriel. _On the Site of a Mulberry Tree planted by
        W. Shakespeare_, 185.

    Rossetti, W. M. _Collected Works_ of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, 185.

    Roubiliac. His statue of Shakespeare, 26, 307.

    _Round Table, The._ By William Hazlitt, 137.

    Rowe, Nicholas. _Some Account of the life of William Shakespeare_,
        78.
      On Shakespeare’s knowledge of the ancients, 78.
      Shakespeare’s first editor, 16.
      His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 53, 78.

    Rowfant Library Catalogue, 198.

    _Runne, and a Great Caste._ By Thomas Freeman, 39.

    Rupert, Prince. His knowledge of Shakespeare, 7.

    Ruskin, John. _Fors Clavigera_, 273.
      _The Mystery of Life and its Arts_, 184.


    Saunders, John. William Pattison’s verses to, 23.

    Schlosser’s _Literary History_. De Quincey’s article on, 254.

    _Schoolmistress, The._ By William Shenstone, 24.

    Scott, Dr. Edward J. L. His discovery of allusions to Shakespeare in
        the Sloane Manuscripts, 5.

    Scott, Sir Walter. His article on “Drama” in the _Encyclopædia
        Britannica_, 129.

    _Scourge of Folly, The._ By John Davies, 38.

    _Seasons, The._ By James Thomson, 88.

    Second Folio edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 7, 10, 49, 50.

    _Secret Drama of Shakespeare’s Sonnets, The._ By Gerald Massey, 209.

    Sedley, Sir Charles. _Prologue_ to _The Wary Widdow, or Sir Noisy
        Parrat_, by Henry Higden, 75.

    Seeley, J. R. _Goethe reviewed after Sixty Years_, 217.

    _Select Beauties of Ancient English Poetry._ Collected by Henry
        Headley, 26 _n._

    Seward, Anna. _On Shakespeare’s Monument at Stratford-upon-Avon_,
        123.

    Shaftesbury, Lord. His estimate of Shakespeare, 10.

    Shakespeare, William. His “artistic discretion,” 174.
      His knowledge and use of the Bible, 176.
      Compared with Addison, 18, 91.
      Compared with Bacon, 168, 316.
      Compared with Fletcher, 92.
      Compared with Goethe, 158, 159.
      Compared with Homer, 82.
      Compared with Ben Jonson, 15, 53, 61, 69, 80, 92, 98, 104, 114.
      Compared with Milton, 131, 170.
      His creation of the fairy world, 83.
      Debased by interpolations, 15, 103.
      The effect of his genius on the taste of the nation, 129.
      His epitaph in Stratford-on-Avon Church, viii, 41.
      First Folio edition of his _Works_, 6, 42, 45, 46, 47.
      History of opinion of, its division into periods, 3.
      The “impersonality” of his writings, 155, 174.
      Influence of eighteenth century research on his reputation, ix.
      Jubilee celebration at Boston, 1824, 142.
      His learning, 79, 224.
      _Life._ By Sidney Lee, 216.
      _Life._ By Nicholas Rowe, 78.
      His monument in Westminster Abbey, 225.
      As a “philosophical aristocrat,” 132 _n._
      Presentation of his plays on the stage, 10-12.
      His _Poems_, 55.
      Popular fallacies relating to his reputation, 6-12.
      Was he influenced by posthumous fame? 137.
      His use of prose, 195.
      His reputation in the seventeenth century, 4-12;
        in the eighteenth century, 12-26;
        in the nineteenth century, 27-30.
      Second Folio edition of his _Works_, 7, 10, 49, 50.
      The “Shakespearean Show,” 1884, 204 _n._
      His “solecism of speech,” 68.
      His statue in Central Park, New York, 186.
      The Stratford-on-Avon Jubilee, 25.
      Tercentennial celebration, 177.
      His time compared with that of Augustus, 72.
      His neglect of the unities, 17, 18.

    _Shakespeare, an Epistle to Mr. Garrick._ By Robert Lloyd, 25.

    _Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist._ By G. Moulton, 271.

    _Shakespeare-Bacon Controversy, The._ By Judge Willis, 326.

    _Shakespeare in oral Tradition._ By Sidney Lee, 5.

    _Shakespeare’s Bedside_, 301.

    _Shakespeare’s Centurie of Prayse._ By Dr. Ingleby, vii, 4.
      Edited by L. Toulmin Smith, viii, 5.

    _Shakespeare’s Garland_, 113, 116, 298, 299, 301.

    _Shakespeare’s Knowledge and Use of the Bible._ By Bishop Charles
        Wordsworth, 176.

    _Shakespeare Sonnets._ By Mathilde Blind, 213.

    _Shakspere: A Critical Study of his Mind and Art._ By Edward Dowden,
        28, 190, 267.

    Shelley, Percy Bysshe. _Lines written among the Euganean Hills_,
        235.

    Shenstone, William. _The Schoolmistress_, 24.

    Sheppard, Samuel. _In Memory of our Famous Shakespeare_, from
        _Epigrams_, 59.

    _Shooting Niagara: and After?_ By Thomas Carlyle, 264.

    _Short Studies on Great Subjects._ By James Anthony Froude, 167.

    Sloane Manuscripts, Allusions to Shakespeare in, 5.

    Smart, Christopher. _Prologue to Othello_, 96.

    Smith, L. Toulmin. Her edition of Ingleby’s _Shakespeare’s Centurie
        of Prayse_, viii, 5.

    _Sociable Letters. By the Lady Marchioness of Newcastle_, 64, 277.

    _Soliloquy in Imitation of Hamlet._ By William Hamilton, 24.

    _Some Remarks on the Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark_, 27.

    Somervile, William. _Lines to Mr. Addison_, 23.

    _Some 300 Fresh Allusions to Shakspere from 1594 to 1694._ Edited by
        Dr. Furnivall, viii, 5.

    _Songs and Sonnets of William Shakespeare._ Edited by Francis Turner
        Palgrave, 181.

    _Songs of many Seasons._ By Oliver Wendell Holmes, 177.

    Sonnets. By Matthew Arnold, 29, 169.
      By Mathilde Blind, 213.
      By Robert Browning, 204.
      By Hartley Coleridge, 148.
      By Richard Watson Gilder, 212.
      By Thomas Freeman, 39.
      By Hugh Holland, 45.
      By John Keats, 138.
      By George Meredith, 202.
      By Dante Gabriel Rossetti, 185.
      By Algernon Charles Swinburne, 29, 201.
      By Archbishop Trench, 180.
      By John Weever, 37.
      By William Wordsworth, 127.

    _Sonnets, with other Poems._ By William Lisle Bowles, 124.

    _Sonnets dedicated to Liberty._ By William Wordsworth, 127.

    _Souls of Books, The._ By Lord Lytton, 259.

    _Southerne, Mr., An Epistle to._ By Elijah Fenton, 80.

    Southey, Robert, and Richard Porson. Imaginary conversation. By
        W. S. Landor, 316.
      _A Vision of Judgment_, 238.

    _Spectator, The_, No. 45. By Joseph Addison, 278.
      No. 592. By Joseph Addison, 84.

    Spenser, Edmund, 40, 42.

    Sprague, Charles. Prize Ode recited at the representation of the
        Shakespeare Jubilee at Boston, 1824, 142.

    _Spirit of Shakespeare, The._ By George Meredith, 202.

    _Stanzas on an Infant._ By D. M. Moir, 257.

    _State Worthies._ By David Lloyd, 13.

    Steele, Sir Richard. _The Tatler_, No. 8, 76.

    Steevens, George. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 20.

    Sterling, John. _Shakespeare_, 153.

    Sterne, Laurence. _Yorick’s Sentimental Journey through France and
        Italy_, 295.

    Story, William Wetmore. _The Mighty Makers_, 205.

    Stratford-on-Avon. Lines _on Shakespeare’s Monument_ at. By Anna
        Seward, 123.
      _Monody_ written near. By Thomas Warton, 121.
      Shakespeare’s epitaph in the church at, viii, 41.

    _Study of Shakespeare, A._ By A. C. Swinburne, 28, 199, 201.

    Suckling, Sir John, 53.

    Swinburne, Algernon Charles. _An Autumn Vision_, 201 _n._
      _A Study of Shakespeare_, 28, 199, 201.
      _William Shakespeare_, from _Tristram of Lyonesse and other
          Poems_, 29, 201.

    Symons, Arthur. _Poetical Works_ of Mathilde Blind, 213.


    _Table Talk._ By S. T. Coleridge, 240, 243, 246.

    _Table Talk._ By William Hazlitt, 237.

    _Table Talk._ By Leigh Hunt, 166.

    _Table Talker, The._ By —— Johnstone, 156.

    _Tancred and Sigismunda._ James Thomson’s _Prologue_ to, 222.

    Tate, Nahum. His “borrowings” from _King Lear_, 10.

    _Tatler, The_, No. 8. By Richard Steele, 76.

    Taylor, Bayard. _Shakespeare’s Statue, Central Park, New York_, 186.

    _Tempest, The_, 145.
      Coleridge’s _Note_ on, 132 _n._
      Dryden’s _Prologue_ to, 66.

    Tennyson, Alfred, Lord, on _King Lear, The Winter’s Tale, and
        Cymbeline_, 214.
      _Life and Works._ Edited by Hallam, Lord Tennyson, 214.

    Tennyson, Hallam, Lord. _Life and Works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson_,
        214.

    Terence, George Colman’s translation of, 224.

    _Theatrum Poetarum._ By Edward Phillips, 10, 71.

    Theobald, Lewis. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 16, 89.

    Thomson, James. _Prologue to Tancred and Sigismunda_, 222.
      _The Seasons_, 88.

    Thomson, William. _In Shakespeare’s Walk_, from _Garden
        Inscriptions_, 110.

    _Thoughts on the Avon._ By Leigh Hunt, 233.

    Tomkins, Thomas. _Poems on Various Subjects_, 26 _n._

    _Tour of Dr. Syntax in Search of the Picturesque, The._ By William
        Combe, 308.

    Trench, Archbishop Richard Chevenix. _Poems Collected and Arranged
        anew_, 180.

    _Tristram of Lyonesse and other Poems._ By A. C. Swinburne, 201.

    _Troilus and Cressida_, Dryden’s _Prologue_ to, 67.

    _Twenty-third of April, The._ By Richard Watson Gilder, 212.

    _Two Worlds, The._ By Richard Watson Gilder, 212.


    _Under Green Leaves._ By Charles Mackay, 260.

    _Unfortunate Likeness, An._ By W. S. Gilbert, 318.


    “Variorum” editions of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 20.

    _Venus and Adonis._ Edward Phillips’ criticism of, 71.

    _Verbal Criticism, Of._ By David Mallet, 103.

    _Versification of English Tragedy, Of the._ By John Armstrong, 100.

    _Vindication of Poesie._ By George Daniel, 58.

    _Vision of Judgment, A._ By Robert Southey, 238.

    _Vision of Poets, A._ By Elizabeth Barrett Browning, 252.

    Voltaire. His comparison of Shakespeare with Addison, 18.
      _An Epistle to._ By George Keate, 112.


    Walpole, Horace, Earl of Orford, 13.
      _Letters_, 99, 226, 305.

    Warburton, Bishop William. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 95,
        283.
      On Shakespeare’s knowledge of the Ancients, 79.

    Warner, Richard, 303, 304 _n._

    Warton, Joseph, 303, 304 _n._
      _The Enthusiast_, 91.
      _Monody_ on the Death of. By W. L. Bowles, 228.

    Warton, Thomas. His misinterpretation of the Shakespeare allusion in
        Milton’s _Eikonoklastes_, 8.
      _Monody written near Stratford-upon-Avon_, 121.

    _Wary Widdow, or Sir Noisy Parrat, The._ By Henry Higden, 75.
      Sir Charles Sedley’s _Prologue_ to, 75.

    Watson, William. _Epigrams of Art, Life, and Nature_, 270.

    Watts-Dunton, Theodore. _Christmas at the Mermaid_, from _The Coming
        of Love_, 325.

    Webb, Daniel. _Literary Amusements_, 227.

    Weever, John. _Ad Gulielmum Shakespeare_, from _Epigrammes in the
        Oldest Cut and Newest Fashion_, 37.

    West, Benjamin, 148.

    Westminster Abbey, Shakespeare’s Monument in, 225.

    Whitehead, Paul. _Verses dropped in Mr. Garrick’s Temple of
        Shakespeare_, 30.

    Whitehead, William. His Appreciation of Shakespeare, 24.
      _A Charge to the Poets_, 109.
      _An Hymn to the Nymph of Bristol_, 24.

    Whitman, Walt. On Shakespeare’s unacceptability to America and
        Democracy, 210.
      _Poetry to-day in America_, 211.

    Willis, Judge William. _The Shakespeare-Bacon Controversy_, 326.

    Wilson, John. _A Few Words on Shakespeare_, from _Essays, Critical
        and Imaginative_, 140.

    _Winter’s Tale, The_, 145, 214.
      Dryden’s criticism of, 68.

    Wiseman, Cardinal. _William Shakespeare_, 179, 263.

    _Witt’s Recreations_, 219.

    Wordsworth, Bishop Charles. _On Shakespeare’s Knowledge and Use of
        the Bible_, 176.

    Wordsworth, Christopher. _Memoirs of William Wordsworth_, 159, 256.

    Wordsworth, William. His influence on the poetry of the nineteenth
        century, 27.
      _Memoirs._ By Christopher Wordsworth, 159, 256.
      _Poems._ Edited by Matthew Arnold, 196.
      On Shakespeare and Goethe, 159.
      His Sonnet, “It is not to be thought of,” 29, 127.

    _Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and other Essays._ By David Masson,
        168.

    _Worthies of England._ By Thomas Fuller, 61.

    Wycherley, William, 12.


    Young, Edward. _Conjectures on Original Composition_, 104, 224.
      _Epistle to Lord Lansdowne_, 83.

    _Yorick’s Sentimental Journey through France and Italy._ By Laurence
        Sterne, 295.


_Printed by_ MORRISON & GIBB LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


The following corrections have been made to the original text:

    Page vii: but he pays scant attention[original has “attentien”]
    to the nineteenth

    Page 25: his paper kite to fly.”[quotation mark missing in
    original]

    Page 36: RICHARD BARNFIELD[original has “BARNFEILD”], 1598

    Page 78: p. iii.[period missing in original] prefixed to _Works
    of Shakespeare_

    Page 105: Which his own genius only could acquire.”[quotation
    mark missing in original]

    Page 109: dead letter Shakespeare’s noblest scene.[original has
    a comma]

    Page 112: adulatory verses written on the same
    occasion.[letters “sion.” missing in original]—KEATE.

    Page 117: He ceases to be Euripides; he is Medea[original has
    “Meda”]

    Page 123: “[original has a single quote]The British Eagle,”
    _i.e._ Milton.

    Page 129: mistaken the form for the essence[original has
    “esssence”]

    Page 129: as comprehensive and versatile,[comma missing in
    original] as intense

    Page 151: the emblazonries upon Shakespeare’s[original has
    “Shakepeare’s”] shield.

    Page 151: seems the mere rebound of the previous[original has
    “precious”] speech

    Page 206: _Poems._ 1886, vol. ii. pp. 273-4.[period missing in
    original]

    Page 218: _Henry V._[original has “v.”] V. prol. 23.

    Page 300: And men shall give us honour for his sake.”[quotation
    mark missing in original]

    Page 321: Should say such un-Shakespearean things!’[quotation
    mark missing in original]

    Page 331: _Art of English Poetry._[original has a comma] By
    Edward Bysshe

    Page 331: Barnfield[original has “Barnfeild”], Richard.

    Page 331: Bowle, John.[original has a comma] _Miscellaneous
    Pieces of Ancient English Poetry_

    Page 333: under “Dodsley,” 26 _n._[period missing in original],
    123.

    Page 333: Elegie[original has “Elgie”] on the Death of the
    famous Writer

    Page 334: Hanmer[original has “Hamner”], Sir Thomas.

    Page 335: under “Headley, Henry,” 26 _n._[italics added to
    match pattern of Index entries]

    Page 336: Johnstone, ——.[period missing in original] _The Table
    Talker_, 156.

    Page 336: performance of “Richard II.,”[comma missing
    in original] 144

    Page 338: _Poems in Divers Humors._ By Richard
    Barnfield[original has “Barnfeild”], 36.

    Page 340: _Shakespeare’s Centurie of Prayse._ By Dr. Ingleby,
    vii,[original has a period] 4.

    Page 341: under “Stratford-on-Avon,” _Monody_ written near. By
    Thomas Warton, 121.[original has a period after “Warton” and
    “121.” is missing]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Praise of Shakespeare, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRAISE OF SHAKESPEARE ***

***** This file should be named 57863-0.txt or 57863-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/8/6/57863/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Praise of Shakespeare, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Praise of Shakespeare
       An English Anthology

Author: Various

Compiler: C. E. Hughes

Release Date: September 7, 2018 [EBook #57863]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRAISE OF SHAKESPEARE ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







Transcriber’s Notes: Words in italics in the original are surrounded
with _underscores_. Words in mixed case and all cap small caps are in
capital letters. Variations in spelling and hyphenation remain as in
the original. A row of asterisks represents a thought break. A row of
periods represents an ellipsis. Ellipses match the original. A complete
list of corrections follows the text.




THE PRAISE OF SHAKESPEARE




                             THE PRAISE OF

                              SHAKESPEARE


                         AN ENGLISH ANTHOLOGY


                              COMPILED BY

                             C. E. HUGHES


                           WITH A PREFACE BY

                              SIDNEY LEE


                             METHUEN & CO.
                         36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                                LONDON
                                 1904


    Death makes no conquest of this conqueror;
    For now he lives in fame, though not in life.

                                        RICHARD III., III. i. 87.


    Who is it that says most? which can say more
      Than this rich praise,—that you alone are you?
    In whose confine immured is the store
      Which should example where your equal grew.
    Lean penury within that pen doth dwell,
      That to his subject lends not some small glory;
    But he that writes of you, if he can tell
      That you are you, so dignifies his story;
    Let him but copy what in you is writ,
      Not making worse what nature made so clear,
    And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
      Making his style admired everywhere.

                                                   SONNET LXXXIV.




PREFACE


I believe this volume serves a useful purpose. It is the fruit of a
suggestion which I made to its compiler, Mr. Hughes, in the following
circumstances.

At the beginning of last year I engaged in controversy in the _Times_
newspaper with certain persons who laboured under the delusion that the
evidence of Shakespeare’s authorship of those plays and poems, which
for three centuries have been published as his, was inconclusive. In
defiance of the fact that the acknowledged work of Bacon, the prose
writer and philosopher, proves him to be incapable of writing verse
of genuine merit, some of my opponents held Bacon and no other to be
responsible for those manifestations of supreme poetic genius which
are associated with Shakespeare’s name. Other sceptics, of less raw
judgment, hesitated to commit themselves to this extravagance,—they
confined themselves to the slightly more plausible contention that the
facts recorded of Shakespeare by contemporaries were scanty, and that
his career was clothed in a mystery, which justified wild attempts at a
solution.

The whole of the sceptical argument ignored alike the results of
recent Shakespearean research and the elementary truths of Elizabethan
literary history. But confirmed sceptics are not easily convinced
of defects of knowledge. With especial emphasis did even the most
enlightened among those who declared their doubt in print, persist in
affirming that Shakespeare was unnoticed by his contemporaries, and
that his achievements failed to win reputation in his lifetime or in
the generations succeeding his death. It was that allegation, to a
greater degree than any other, which seemed to encourage the inference
that the received tradition of the Shakespearean authorship of the
plays needed revision.

The conjecture that Shakespeare lived and died unhonoured rests on no
foundation of fact. The converse alone is true. Shakespeare’s eminence
was fully acknowledged by his contemporaries, and their acknowledgments
have long been familiar to scholars.

Yet the reiterated assertion that Shakespeare’s contemporaries left
on record no recognition of his worth, proved that information on the
subject was narrowly diffused, and that public intelligence suffered
by the strait limits as yet assigned to the distribution of genuine
knowledge of the topic. I suggested to Mr. Hughes that he should
remedy this defect by collecting in a volume that might be generally
accessible all notices of Shakespeare which were penned in early days.

Subsequently, when I considered the scheme in detail, I deemed it wise
for Mr. Hughes to enlarge its scope so that the volume might form a
contribution to the history of opinion respecting Shakespeare of no
single period, but of all periods from the earliest to the present
day. Thereby the force and persistence of that Shakespearean tradition
which ignorance had lately impugned might be rendered plainer, and the
liability to misconception might be to a greater degree diminished.
The fulfilment of the design on the extended scale might also, I
thought, give the work some value as a chart of æsthetic development
through the ages. Students of Shakespeare who in the course of three
centuries have recorded their impressions of him, include men and
women of varying degrees of intellectual capacity, and the orderly
presentation of their views could not fail to illustrate with some
graphic force the working of the law of taste in literature.

A further justification for the compilation of the work on an
exhaustive scale, lies in the fact that it has not been done already.
Charles Knight seems to be the only writer who has hitherto attempted
any sketch of a general history of opinion respecting Shakespeare. His
essay formed part of his _Studies of Shakespeare_, which were first
published in 1849, and it was reissued separately as the first volume
of a new edition of his Cabinet Edition of _Shakespeare_ which was
published in London by William S. Orr & Co., of Paternoster Row, in
1851.[vii:1] Knight surveys his subject somewhat perfunctorily from
Edmund Spenser to Coleridge. He devotes much space to the eighteenth
century, but he pays scant attention to the nineteenth, and he is far
from exhaustive in his treatment of earlier periods. Commendable as is
his pioneer effort, it is now, alike in form and matter, largely out of
date.

A more imposing endeavour was made later to deal with the earlier
section of the topic. Dr. Ingleby, a Shakespearean scholar of repute,
issued in 1874 the work entitled _Shakespeare’s Centurie of Prayse_,
in which he dealt with the period extending from the year 1591, when
Shakespeare first came into notice as a dramatist, until 1693. A
second edition of Dr. Ingleby’s volume, revised and enlarged by Miss
Toulmin Smith, appeared five years later under the auspices of the
New Shakspere Society. A very substantial supplement to this volume,
called _Some 300 Fresh Allusions to Shakspere from 1594 to 1694_, was
edited by Dr. Furnivall for the New Shakspere Society in 1886. Thus the
_Centurie of Prayse_ in its final shape extends to 912 pages in quarto.
The large book is not at everybody’s disposal, but its contents, as far
as they go, are very valuable, and no Shakespeare library is complete
without it. None the less, it covers less than a third part of that
field which a full history of opinion about Shakespeare ought to
occupy; it leaves ample room for a treatise on the whole subject.

The general impression produced by Mr. Hughes’s extended survey seems
creditable to the discernment of the English literary public—of
all generations since Shakespeare began to write. The repute that
Shakespeare acquired in his lifetime, though it was rarely defined
with subtlety, was in spirit all that judicious admirers could desire.
The contemporary estimate was authoritatively summed up in the epitaph
which was inscribed on his monument in Stratford-on-Avon church soon
after his death. In that inscription he was hailed as the equal of
great heroes of classical antiquity—of Nestor in wisdom, of Socrates
in genius, of Virgil in literary art; he was acknowledged in plain
terms to be the greatest of contemporary writers; all living writers
were declared to be worthy only to serve him as pages or menials.
Shakespeare’s epitaph, the significance of which is not always
appreciated, justifies no doubt of the supremacy that he enjoyed in
the English world of letters of his own day. The homage of literary
contemporaries was confirmed without faltering and in finer phrase by
Milton, the next occupant of the throne of English letters.

No subsequent change of literary taste or literary fashion in England
really dimmed Shakespeare’s fame. In the days of the Restoration,
Dryden humbly acknowledged discipleship to him. Some censure he
suffered from thoughtless lips; but the right to the rank of a classic,
which had been granted him as soon as the breath left his body, was
never effectually disputed. The formal critics of the eighteenth
century sought to show that much of his work deviated from formal
standards or from rules of formal art. But these censors gave him the
worship of incessant study. They edited and annotated his writings,
with the result that a succeeding generation of readers acquired a
more accurate comprehension of his work than was possible before.
The triumphal progress of Shakespeare’s reputation was stimulated by
eighteenth century research and criticism to a quicker pace.

The critical faculty of the nation was especially acute and sagacious
at the opening of the nineteenth century, and Shakespeare’s
pre-eminence was then seen in sharper outline and in fuller grandeur
than at any earlier epoch. The sympathetic intuition of three early
nineteenth century critics—Coleridge, Lamb, and Hazlitt—remains
unsurpassed. But there has been no trace of retrogression in the wise
and reasoned enthusiasm of later generations of the reading public.

The history of Shakespeare’s fame is indeed that of a flowing tide; the
ebbing was never long enough sustained to give it genuine importance;
the forward march was never seriously impeded, and is from start
to finish the commanding feature of the chronicle. If Mr. Hughes’s
endeavour succeed in impressing that pregnant fact on the public mind,
a perilous source of popular misconception regarding Shakespeare’s true
place in English literary history will be removed.

                                                      SIDNEY LEE.


FOOTNOTES:

[vii:1] This volume bore the title, _Studies of Shakspere: introductory
volume, containing A History of Opinion on the Writings of Shakspere;
with the Chronology of his Plays_. The book in this form seems now to
be difficult of access. No copy of it is in the British Museum Library.
I acquired a copy for a few pence many years ago.




CONTENTS


                                                                PAGE
    PREFACE BY SIDNEY LEE                                          v
    SOME NOTES ON SHAKESPEARE’S REPUTATION                         1


    PART I

    “THESE THREE HUNDRED YEARS”


    THE FIRST PERIOD

           1596  Francis Meres                                    35
           1598  Richard Barnfield                                36
           1599  John Weever                                      37
           1610  John Davies                                      38
           1614  Thomas Freeman                                   39
           1622  William Basse                                    40
           1623  Anonymous                                        41
           1623  Ben Jonson                                       42
           1623  Hugh Holland                                     45
           1623  John Heminge and Henrie Condell                  46
           1623  Leonard Digges                                   47
           1627  Michael Drayton                                  48
           1630  John Milton                                      49
           1632  I. M. S.                                         50
    _a._   1633  John Hales                                       53
           1637  Sir William D’Avenant                            54
    _c._   1637  Anonymous                                        55
           1639  Thomas Bancroft                                  57
           1647  George Daniel                                    58
           1651  Samuel Sheppard                                  59
    _c._   1661  Thomas Fuller                                    61
         1662-7  Samuel Pepys                                     62
           1664  Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle         64
           1667  John Dryden                                      66
           1668  John Dryden                                      67
           1672  Anonymous                                        69
           1675  Edward Phillips                                  71
           1680  Thomas Otway                                     72
           1681  “A Person of Honour”                             74
           1693  Sir Charles Sedley                               75


    THE SECOND PERIOD

           1709  Sir Richard Steele                               76
           1709  Nicholas Rowe                                    78
           1711  Elijah Fenton                                    80
           1712  John Dennis                                      82
           1712  Edward Young                                     83
           1714  Joseph Addison                                   84
           1725  Alexander Pope                                   85
           1727  James Thomson                                    88
           1733  Lewis Theobald                                   89
           1740  Joseph Warton                                    91
           1743  William Collins                                  92
           1744  Sir Thomas Hanmer                                93
           1747  Samuel Johnson                                   94
           1747  Bishop William Warburton                         95
           1751  Christopher Smart                                96
           1754  David Hume                                       97
           1756  Horace Walpole                                   99
           1758  John Armstrong                                  100
           1759  William Mason                                   101
           1759  Thomas Gray                                     102
           1759  David Mallet                                    103
           1759  Edward Young                                    104
    _c._   1760  Mark Akenside                                   105
           1760  Robert Lloyd                                    106
           1760  Edward Capell                                   107
           1761  Charles Churchill                               108
           1762  William Whitehead                               109
           1763  William Thompson                                110
           1765  Samuel Johnson                                  111
           1768  George Keate                                    112
           1769  David Garrick                                   113
           1769  Anonymous                                       116
           1774  William Richardson                              117
           1775  William Julius Mickle                           119
           1777  William Hayley                                  120
           1777  Thomas Warton                                   121
    _a._   1782  Anna Seward                                     123
           1794  William Lisle Bowles                            124


    THE THIRD PERIOD

           1802  William Wordsworth                              127
           1804  Felicia Dorothea Hemans                         128
           1814  Sir Walter Scott                                129
           1817  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         130
           1817  Francis, Lord Jeffrey                           133
           1818  William Hazlitt                                 135
    _c._   1818  John Keats                                      138
    _c._   1818  John Keats                                      138
           1819  John Wilson                                     140
           1824  Charles Sprague                                 142
           1824  Charles Lamb                                    144
           1827  Julius Charles Hare                             145
           1831  James Hogg                                      146
           1833  Charles Lamb                                    148
           1833  Hartley Coleridge                               149
           1838  Thomas de Quincey                               150
           1839  John Sterling                                   153
           1839  Henry Hallam                                    155
           1840  —— Johnstone                                    156
           1840  Thomas Carlyle                                  157
           1841  William Wordsworth                              159
           1843  Lord Macaulay                                   160
           1844  Ralph Waldo Emerson                             162
           1850  Frederick William Robertson                     164
           1851  Leigh Hunt                                      166
           1852  James Anthony Froude                            167
           1853  David Masson                                    168
           1853  Matthew Arnold                                  169
           1853  Walter Savage Landor                            170
           1858  John Henry Newman                               171
    _c._   1858  James Russell Lowell                            173
           1863  Nathaniel Hawthorne                             175
           1864  Bishop Charles Wordsworth                       176
           1864  Oliver Wendell Holmes                           177
           1865  Cardinal Wiseman                                179
           1865  Archbishop Trench                               180
           1865  Francis Turner Palgrave                         181
           1866  Frances Anne Kemble                             183
           1868  John Ruskin                                     184
           1871  Dante Gabriel Rossetti                          185
           1872  Bayard Taylor                                   186
           1874  William Minto                                   189
           1875  Edward Dowden                                   190
           1877  George Meredith                                 191
           1877  Frederick James Furnivall                       192
           1878  Walter Horatio Pater                            193
           1879  Matthew Arnold                                  195
  ? _c._   1880  Anonymous                                       197
           1880  Algernon Charles Swinburne                      199
           1882  Algernon Charles Swinburne                      201
           1883  George Meredith                                 202
           1884  Robert Browning                                 204
           1886  William Wetmore Story                           205
           1886  Thomas Spencer Baynes                           207
           1888  Gerald Massey                                   209
           1890  Walt Whitman                                    210
           1891  Richard Watson Gilder                           212
    _c._   1894  Mathilde Blind                                  213
    _a._   1892  Alfred, Lord Tennyson                           214
           1899  Sidney Lee                                      215


    PART II

    “GOOD SENTENCES”

           1639  Anonymous                                       219
           1681  John Crowne                                     220
           1737  Alexander Pope                                  221
           1745  James Thomson                                   222
           1767  Anonymous                                       223
    _a._   1767  George Colman                                   224
           1776  Richard Graves                                  225
           1778  Horace Walpole                                  226
           1787  Daniel Webb                                     227
           1801  William Lisle Bowles                            228
           1807  Felicia Dorothea Hemans                         229
           1811  Francis, Lord Jeffrey                           230
           1811  George Dyer                                     231
           1812  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         232
           1813  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         232
           1817  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         232
           1817  Leigh Hunt                                      233
           1818  William Hazlitt                                 234
           1818  Percy Bysshe Shelley                            235
           1819  John Keats                                      236
           1821  William Hazlitt                                 237
           1821  Robert Southey                                  238
           1821  Lord Byron                                      239
           1822  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         240
           1827  Thomas Hood                                     241
           1828  Thomas Carlyle                                  242
           1830  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         243
           1830  Anonymous                                       244
           1831  Lord Macaulay                                   245
           1834  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         246
           1836  Samuel Taylor Coleridge                         246
           1837  Leigh Hunt                                      247
           1838  Thomas de Quincey                               248
           1839  Thomas de Quincey                               248
           1839  Thomas Carlyle                                  249
           1844  Leigh Hunt                                      250
           1844  Ralph Waldo Emerson                             251
           1844  Elizabeth Barrett Browning                      252
    _a._   1846  Walter Savage Landor                            253
           1847  Thomas de Quincey                               254
           1850  Robert Browning                                 255
    _a._   1850  William Wordsworth                              256
    _a._   1851  David Macbeth Moir                              257
           1851  Thomas Lovell Beddoes                           258
           1853  Edward Bulwer, Lord Lytton                      259
           1857  Charles Mackay                                  260
    _c._   1860  Abraham Lincoln                                 261
           1860  Ralph Waldo Emerson                             262
           1865  Cardinal Wiseman                                263
           1867  Thomas Carlyle                                  264
           1867  Matthew Arnold                                  265
           1870  James Russell Lowell                            266
           1875  Edward Dowden                                   267
           1879  Matthew Arnold                                  268
           1882  Dante Gabriel Rossetti                          269
           1884  William Watson                                  270
           1893  Richard Green Moulton                           271
           1894  Sir John Robert Seeley                          272
           1896  John Ruskin                                     273


    PART III

    “ROUND ABOUT”

           1664  Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle        277
           1711  Joseph Addison                                  278
           1743  Henry Fielding                                  279
           1747  Thomas Edwards                                  281
           1749  Mark Akenside                                   284
           1751  Robert Lloyd                                    288
           1765  Oliver Goldsmith                                291
           1765  George, Lord Lyttelton                          292
           1768  Laurence Sterne                                 295
           1769  Anonymous                                       298
           1769  Isaac Bickerstaff                               299
           1778  Anonymous                                       302
           1788  Horace Walpole                                  305
           1790  Paul Whitehead                                  306
           1812  William Combe                                   308
           1826  Charles Lamb                                    313
           1845  Nathaniel Hawthorne                             314
           1846  Walter Savage Landor                            316
           1868  William Schwenck Gilbert                        318
           1872  Oliver Wendell Holmes                           323
           1897  Theodore Watts-Dunton                           325
           1902  Judge Willis                                    326

                 To My Very Good Friend, Mr William Shakespeare  329

                 INDEX                                           331




SOME NOTES ON SHAKESPEARE’S REPUTATION


I

INTRODUCTORY

This book provides a chronological sequence of the best pieces in verse
and prose which the best writers in successive periods have written
in praise of Shakespeare, and thereby aims at presenting, as it were,
an index to the standard of estimation in which Shakespeare has been
held at any given point of time. Thus, as an anthology, it differs in
various respects from other anthologies. An anthology, as a rule, hopes
to confine itself to pieces of literature intrinsically valuable. The
conscientious compiler of an ordinary anthology includes nothing which,
according to his own canons of taste, can be considered of doubtful
merit. His choice may not always be approved by others—it frequently
is not; but he, at least, is satisfied. Here, however, is a different
case. My object has been to collect what may be called materials for a
history of opinion of Shakespeare, so that as many years as might be
of the three centuries and more, which have elapsed since Shakespeare’s
reputation was born, had to be represented. With these conditions it
has not always been possible to exclude bad pieces, for the obvious
reason that there has been at times a dearth of good writers. In such
cases the best has been given that could be found. The best has at
times been deplorably mediocre, but the scheme was inexorable.

The labour of selection has been guided by one or two principles.
In the first place, complete poems, or extracts in verse and prose,
which relate solely to Shakespeare have been taken in preference to
those which mention him in company with his contemporaries. Secondly,
passages that exhibit unusual characteristics, whether good or bad,
have frequently been chosen. For some of the poor pieces, and I hope
they are not many, something may be said. Though their writers are
practically forgotten to-day, they were considered great during their
own lives; so their productions have at least a historical value. If,
then, this volume includes, as I think it does, the best things that
have been written about Shakespeare, it includes also many things
that in a comparative estimate of the whole must be considered as
second-rate, though they happened to be the best in the period during
which they were produced. The distinctiveness of the book may perhaps
be indicated in this way. An ordinary anthology may be said to gather
into a garland the choicest flowers from various fields of literature;
this anthology claims to be little more than a collection of botanical
specimens.


II

DIVISION INTO PERIODS

The history of opinion of Shakespeare may be divided into three
periods, represented broadly by the seventeenth, eighteenth, and
nineteenth centuries. Definite limits cannot be assigned to these three
periods. Epochs of literary history must be determined ultimately,
not by the work produced in them, or by the lives of the producers,
but by the influences which gradually brought them into being. Thus,
there must always be at the beginning and end of a period of literary
history a kind of dovetailing with it of the periods before and after.
Still, the three periods I have indicated are reasonably distinct.
The first begins with the earliest mention of Shakespeare in print,
and may be taken to end with the death of Dryden. The second period
was largely affected by Dryden’s influence, and thus may be said to
begin with the eighteenth century. And the last period, which is due
to the reaction from the Augustan age of English literature, may be
fairly dated from the beginning of the nineteenth century. The style
of the literary products of these three centuries respectively goes to
confirm the division. The first period is that of personal knowledge
and oral tradition, and tributes to Shakespeare are for the most part
in verse. It is the period during which his historical position was in
the making. The second period is that of critics and emendators—the
period when people begin to realise that there is some great power in
Shakespeare’s work which finds no parallel in their own time, and must
therefore be praised blindly, accounted for, or explained away. Tribute
is clothed equally in verse and prose; it is, in short, the period of
doubt and astonishment. The last period is that of æsthetic criticism,
and tribute is mostly in prose. Shakespeare’s position is an accepted
fact.

Of the three periods, the second is by far the most interesting to the
literary historian. Opinion of Shakespeare during the first period
was to a large extent prejudiced by personal knowledge and tradition.
The praise is practically equivalent to that of friends; which is to
say, it is largely that of blind admiration. In the third period it
is open-eyed, intelligent admiration. The matter has been sifted. The
question of Shakespeare’s genius is no longer a debatable point. The
praise is that of disciples who appreciate the logical basis of their
master’s teaching, and who see the necessity of lucid explanation
for the purpose of adding recruits to their number. But the second
period is the time of trial. Shakespeare’s title to fame is weighed
judicially, and is not found wanting.


III

THE FIRST PERIOD

Of the seventeenth century not much need be said, and, indeed, not
much that is new can be said. The labours of the New Shakspere Society
have added several valuable volumes to the literature relating to
Shakespeare’s reputation during that period. Of these the _Centurie of
Prayse_ (of which the second and much enlarged edition was produced
under the direction of Miss L. Toulmin Smith in 1879) brought together
a very large number of allusions to Shakespeare both in print and
manuscript, and these were supplemented by _Some 300 Fresh Allusions_,
a work which was edited by Dr. Furnivall in 1886. These volumes display
an amazing amount of diligent research, and few additions can be made
to their contents. Seven hitherto unnoticed allusions to Shakespeare
were discovered by Dr. Edward J. L. Scott in the Sloane Manuscripts
at the British Museum, and communicated by him to the _Athenæum_
on 5th March 1898.[5:1] This evidence of Shakespeare’s reputation
during the period under discussion has been ably supplemented by an
article entitled _Shakespeare in Oral Tradition_, which Mr. Sidney
Lee contributed to the _Nineteenth Century_ in January 1902. This
traces the actual recollection of Shakespeare by his friends and their
descendants, from his personal acquaintance among the actors and the
townsfolk of Stratford-on-Avon, to the reminiscences transmitted
by word of mouth from Betterton to Nicholas Rowe, the poet’s first
biographer. Mr. Lee’s paper is of the utmost importance. As he
points out, “It was obviously the free circulation of the fame of
Shakespeare’s work which stimulated the activity of interest in his
private fortunes, and led to the chronicling of the oral tradition
regarding them. It could easily be shown that outside the circle
of professional poets, dramatists, actors, and fellow-townsmen,
Shakespeare’s name was, from his first coming into public notice,
constantly on the lips of scholars, statesmen, and men of fashion who
had any glimmer of literary taste.”

The ground, therefore, may be said to be covered in so far as positive
evidence of Shakespeare’s fame in the seventeenth century is concerned.
But at least three popular fallacies have come into being, and it
will be perhaps worth while to state them and definitely refute them.
Their existence is due partly to lack of acquaintance with documentary
evidence, and partly to misconception.

One of these popular fallacies is that Shakespeare practically vanished
from the minds of his countrymen when he retired from the stage; and
that what reputation he had in his lifetime was due to his prominence
as an actor, rather than to his genius as a poet.

The preface of the First Folio (1623) is enough to prove that this was
not the case. The tone of the address “to the great variety of readers”
is not that of publishers trying to awaken interest in a forgotten
personage, by calling attention to works that used to be popular. The
language is that of affectionate friends, the references to Shakespeare
those of intimate associates whose memories have not healed of the
wound inflicted by his death. It was addressed to the public, not with
the diffidence that is born of anxiety lest the subject of eulogy
should meet with an indifferent welcome, but with the confidence that
is inspired by friendship with a great man who is recognised as a
great man.

The second impression of the Folio appeared in 1632, and the spirit of
enthusiasm that breathes through the preliminary matter—the publisher’s
preface and the various sets of verses—has become in no way weakened.
The volume contains, indeed, two of the finest poems of direct personal
eulogy that have ever been written—that signed I. M. S., and attributed
by Coleridge somewhat fancifully to no less a person than John Milton,
and the noble _Epitaph on the admirable Dramatic Poet, W. Shakespeare_,
actually written by Milton in 1630. No sign of decayed reputation
here. Nor elsewhere. King Charles I., it is well known, read
Shakespeare. Copies of his plays and poems are mentioned in Prince
Rupert’s library catalogue. His works were given on the stage, and
formed topics of everyday discussion. One might multiply examples of
his popularity, but it is striking at shadows.

Another popular error has tinged the traditional notion of Milton’s
attitude to Shakespeare. It is supposed that his opinion of Shakespeare
underwent a complete change from that exhibited in the lines mentioned
above. The error that attributes to Milton this surprising revulsion
of feeling is due to a misconception of a certain passage in his
_Eikonoklastes_. Milton wrote thus:

    “Andronicus Comnenus, the Byzantine emperor, though a most
    cruel tyrant, is reported by Nicetas to have been a most
    constant reader of Saint Paul’s Epistles; and by continual
    study had so incorporated the phrase and style of that
    transcendent apostle into all his familiar letters, that the
    imitation seemed to vie with the original. Yet this availed
    not to deceive the people of that empire, who, notwithstanding
    his saint’s vizard, tore him to pieces for his tyranny. From
    stories of this nature, both ancient and modern, which abound,
    the poets also, and some English, have been in this point so
    mindful of decorum as to put never more pious words in the
    mouth of any person than of a tyrant. I shall not instance an
    abstruse author, wherein the king might be less conversant, but
    one whom we well know was the closet companion of these his
    solitudes, William Shakespeare, who introduces the person of
    Richard the Third, speaking in as high a strain of piety and
    mortification as is uttered in any passage of this book [_i.e._
    the _Eikon Basilike_], and sometimes to the same sense and
    purpose with some words in this place: ‘I intended,’ saith he,
    ‘not only to oblige to my friends, but my enemies.’ The like
    saith Richard, Act II. Scene i.:

        “‘I do not know that Englishman alive
          With whom my soul is any jot at odds,
          More than the infant that is born to-night:
          I thank my God for my humility.’

    Other stuff of this sort may be read throughout the whole
    tragedy, wherein the poet used not much licence in departing
    from the truth of history, which delivers him a deep
    dissembler, not of his affections only, but of religion.”

The blundering interpretation of this passage, which Warton accepted
and transmitted to his successors, including De Quincey, is that
Charles I. was reproved by Milton for having made Shakespeare
his closet companion. “The Prince of Wales (afterwards Charles
I.),” says De Quincey in his _Life of Shakespeare_, “had
learned to appreciate Shakespeare, not originally from reading him, but
from witnessing the Court representations of his plays at Whitehall.
Afterwards we know that he made Shakespeare his closet companion,
for he was reproached with doing so by Milton.” A careful perusal
of the passage will show that nothing was farther from Milton’s
intention. Such a deduction is logically impossible. Three things,
however, undoubtedly may be deduced from it; and they not only bear
a significance directly opposed to the erroneous interpretation, but
they are of the highest importance as positive evidence of Milton’s
appreciation of Shakespeare, and of Shakespeare’s literary fame. One
may deduce, firstly, that Shakespeare was known, at any rate by name,
to the Puritans, who chiefly composed the public for which Milton was
writing. Secondly (since Charles was not, we may believe, the man to
read in private books that he did not like), that the king’s knowledge
of Shakespeare was intimate and his appreciation sincere. And, thirdly,
that Shakespeare was, in Milton’s opinion, one who depicts human nature
with accuracy. For, consider the force of the parallel. Milton wrote
to show that the deeds of monarchs are not always the substantiation
of their words. The Byzantine tyrant, with his mouth full of piety, is
cited as one instance; Shakespeare’s Richard III. as being, by
familiarity, likely to bring the matter home to Charles, is cited as
another. Which is, in effect, that Shakespeare’s portrayal of a king
of such character is, in Milton’s opinion, proof that such a king may
exist. There is nothing slighting about that. It is high praise.

Milton wrote his _Eikonoklastes_ in 1649, when he was forty-one. In
1645 he had written his _L’Allegro_, with the lines:

    “Then to the well-trod stage anon
     If Jonson’s learned sock be on,
     Or sweetest Shakespeare fancy’s child,
     Warble his native woodnotes wild.”

The lines attributed to him in the Second Folio had appeared in 1632,
and his fully authenticated _Epitaph_ in 1630. Further, his influence
has been traced in the notice of Shakespeare which appeared in the
_Theatrum Poetarum_, published in 1675 by Edward Phillips, Milton’s
nephew. Here, surely, is sufficient evidence that throughout his life
Milton’s early enthusiasm for Shakespeare did not diminish.

A third popular fallacy is that which maintains Shakespeare’s
reputation to have been at its lowest ebb after the Restoration. This
belief is well expressed in Victor Hugo’s _Shakespeare_.

    “Shakespeare,” says Victor Hugo, “once dead entered into
    oblivion. Under the Restoration he ‘completed his eclipse.’
    He was so thoroughly dead that Davenant, possibly his son,
    recomposed his pieces. There was no longer any _Macbeth_ but
    the _Macbeth_ of Davenant. Dryden speaks of Shakespeare on
    one occasion in order to say that he is ‘out of date.’ Lord
    Shaftesbury calls him ‘a wit out of fashion’ . . .

    “These two men having condemned Shakespeare, the oracle had
    spoken. England, a country more obedient to conventional
    opinion than is generally believed, forgot Shakespeare. Some
    purchaser pulled down his house, New Place. A Rev. Dr. Gastrell
    cut down and burnt his mulberry-tree.[10:1] At the commencement
    of the eighteenth century the eclipse was total. In 1707 one
    called Nahum Tate published a _King Lear_, warning his readers
    ‘that he had borrowed the idea of it from a play which he
    had read by chance, the work of some nameless author.’ This
    ‘nameless author’ was Shakespeare.”

Now the numerous adaptations of Shakespeare’s plays which appeared
after the Restoration have been taken somewhat paradoxically as
indicative of his decline in the public estimation. Such a deduction is
by no means accurate. If we take into consideration the comparatively
low level to which imaginative literature had fallen under the
influence of Charles II.’s Court, the wonder is perhaps that
the theatre-going public should have received Shakespeare in any form.
Such neglect of Shakespeare as is seen at this time is attributable
merely to change of fashion in popular literature, and that was then,
and still is, as mutable as the sea. Popular literature does not live,
and the adaptations of the later Stuart reigns are now known only to
curious students. But Shakespeare lived through it all, known and
appreciated by all who had souls above the vulgar; and in this very
period he passed triumphantly his first examination at the hands of a
skilled critic, John Dryden. Dryden was in every respect typical of the
cultivated class of his period. His early judgment of Shakespeare was
formed in the somewhat flickering light of Restoration taste. His final
estimate was that of a matured thinker. Certainly, adaptations prepared
to suit the fickle taste of the playgoer of the period cannot be said
to reflect the true character of Shakespeare’s reputation. We see the
same thing at the present day. The altruism of theatrical managers
is compelled to make concessions to popular demands. The public are
still rather shy of going to see Shakespeare simply as Shakespeare.
They appear to feel that going to see a play of Shakespeare is like
sacrificing themselves for their own good. So the managers who gild
the pill for them are successful, and those who do not merely fail,
or at best earn a precarious livelihood. One might as well say that
Shakespeare’s reputation is at a very low ebb to-day, as make the
deduction from the fact of the Restoration adaptations. The playgoers
of that period wanted something piquant. One may suppose—to put the
matter in modern terms—that Heine and De Maupassant collaborating might
have produced a popular success. Wycherley and Congreve met the demand
as nearly as possible. But Shakespeare was not the thing.


IV

THE SECOND PERIOD

I have taken 1700, the date of Dryden’s death, as that which most
fittingly marks the close of the first period and the beginning of
the second, for it is very soon after that year that the spirit of
the eighteenth century begins to make itself manifest. In the history
of literature the eighteenth century stands out distinct as a whole.
The literature of the seventeenth century had many characteristics,
which, even in the most cursory survey, require attention, and these
characteristics were mainly due to the connection of literature with
the Court. The pedantic James I. was a patron of learning. His son
Charles I., and grandson Charles II., inherited the taste for polite
letters, and encouraged or influenced indirectly the authors of their
times. But the eighteenth century monarchs were different. They did
not concern themselves much with men of letters, and literature went
its course comparatively unaffected by fashion. But it was affected
by the spirit of the age—the spirit born of gradual recognition of
the Renaissance. As David Lloyd in his _State Worthies_ said of the
early seventeenth century, “it was the very guise at that time to be
learned; the wits of it were so excellent, the helps and assistants of
it were so great; printing was so common; the world (by navigation)
so open; great experiments so disclosed; the leisure of men so much,
the age so peaceable; and His Majesty, after whom all writ, so
knowing.” At that time learning was a novelty, and consequently it was
fashionable—it was “the very guise.” By the eighteenth century great
men had grown accustomed to it; and it was becoming the property of
the lesser worthies, who, unable to resist the temptation to “show
off,” turned out reams of didactic verse, the substance of which would
nowadays hide its light beneath the respectable bushel of the journal
of some scientific society. Dryden was perhaps mainly responsible.
He had pronounced the dictum: “They cannot be good poets who are not
accustomed to argue well.” At any rate, with the eighteenth century the
poetry of argument or logic, as distinct from that of inspiration, came
into being, and by far the greater part of the poetry of the hundred
years that followed Dryden’s death was that of poets who are made
rather than poets who are born. The same feeling informs the prose.
It is true that the age produced Horace Walpole. But Walpole was a
literary trifler, and liked to be thought so, though he was amazingly
industrious. The eighteenth century saw much excellent prose, but it is
almost always the prose of “will” or “must” rather than that of “can.”
It comes rather of fertility of reason than of fertility of fancy. Of
such stock are commentators born.

One finds, accordingly, that the principal producers of pure
literature, whether prose or verse, were also critics, and most of them
turned their attention, sooner or later, to Shakespeare. Prominent
figures in the history of Shakespearean criticism in the eighteenth
century stand Pope and Johnson. Both are classical scholars in an age
of pedants; both are among the foremost advocates of rigid adherence
to prescribed rules in literary production; both place imagination
below intellect in estimation of genius; and both are honoured by
their fellows as arbiters and dictators of literary taste. Each of
them is inclined to say unkind things about Shakespeare, and hardly
dares. Pope is the more generous of the two. “It will be,” he says,
“but fair to allow that most of our author’s faults are less to be
ascribed to his wrong judgment as a poet, than to his right judgment
as a player.” Which is to say, that Shakespeare, poor soul! must needs
trim his boat to suit the current of popular opinion; that the greater
part of his audience in the theatres consisted of low fellows who had
never heard of Aristotle, and must not be troubled with the unities and
such matters, which they could not understand. One has but to continue
this line of argument to conclude that Pope thought Shakespeare so
much a part and product of the age in which he was born, that had
he been born, say, in Pope’s age, he might (which Heaven forbid!)
have been a perfect poet according to Pope’s lights—might, in fact,
have translated Homer, to supply the sixpenny boxes of second-hand
booksellers two centuries later. But Pope certainly thought Shakespeare
very great. His greatness was, perhaps, not of quite the right kind
in Pope’s estimation; but greatness he undoubtedly thought it. As to
Shakespeare’s want of learning, Pope frankly refused to believe in it.
He says very wisely:

    “There is certainly a vast difference between _learning_ and
    _languages_. How far he was ignorant of the latter I cannot
    determine; but ’tis plain he had much reading at least, if they
    will not call it learning. Nor is it any great matter, if a
    man has knowledge, whether he has it from one language or from
    another. . . . I am inclined to think this opinion proceeded
    originally from the zeal of the partizans of our author and Ben
    Jonson, as they endeavoured to exalt the one at the expense of
    the other. It is ever the nature of parties to be in extremes;
    and nothing is so probable as that because Ben Jonson had much
    the more learning, it was said on the one hand that Shakespeare
    had none at all; and because Shakespeare had much the most wit
    and fancy, it was reported on the other that Jonson wanted
    both. Because Shakespeare borrowed nothing, it was said that
    Ben Jonson borrowed everything. Because Jonson did not write
    extempore, he was reproached with being a year about every
    piece; and because Shakespeare wrote with ease and rapidity,
    they cried, he never once made a blot. Nay, the spirit of
    opposition ran so high, that whatever those of the one side
    objected to in the other, was taken at the rebound and turned
    into praises; as injudiciously as their antagonists before had
    made them objections.”

Pope further attributed many of Shakespeare’s errors to the
carelessness or ignorance of the first publishers of his works,
suggesting that the original copies from which they were printed were
no better than the “_prompter’s book_, or _piecemeal parts_ written out
for the use of the actors,” who may be supposed to have made numerous
small excisions and additions.

Thus Pope says in effect that Shakespeare would have been perfect if
the age and conditions in which he lived had allowed him. He sees many
beauties in him, but he also sees many defects; and his edition of
Shakespeare’s works is remarkable chiefly for its omissions of passages
which the editor deems unworthy of his author.

Dr. Johnson is by no means so ready metaphorically to grasp Shakespeare
by the hand. He follows a procession of editors of more or less
ability, and he feels that the time has come for the final settlement
of Shakespeare’s true position. Rowe, the first editor, hardly realised
his responsibilities, and his edition of the plays which appeared
in 1709 has few merits from the critic’s point of view. Pope, who
followed him in 1725, had a reputation for brilliance to sustain,
and his preface is remarkable rather for neatness of expression
than for critical discernment. Theobald came after Pope, in 1733,
with much common sense, which made him the laughing-stock of his
successors. The next editor, Sir Thomas Hanmer, intended his edition
as a tribute to Shakespeare, and what was lacking in criticism was
supplied in good paper and printing. Warburton succeeded with a pompous
self-assertiveness that expressed itself in amusing but ineffective
paradoxes.

Johnson accordingly had a due sense of what was expected of him. His
critical equipment consisted in a knowledge of the classical drama,
and his æsthetic judgment was founded on the rules by which he had
succeeded in his own poetical ventures. Still, he did his best to
assume a strictly unbiassed judicial attitude. He did not, as Macaulay
states, take it for granted that “the kind of poetry which flourished
in his own time, which he had been accustomed to hear praised from
his childhood, and which he had himself written with success, was the
best kind of poetry.” He tried deliberately to approach Shakespeare
as he approached the Cock Lane Ghost. He dealt with him as with some
mysterious phenomenon which was attracting public attention, and which
admitted of explanation. The result was, perhaps, the best balanced
common-sense judgment on record. It contained, on the one hand, the
most tremendous indictment of Shakespeare that is ever likely to be
written; and, on the other, a triumphant defence, coupled with much
enthusiastic eulogy. Here are some of the “faults which,” as he puts
it, “are sufficient to obscure and overwhelm any other merit”:

    “He sacrifices virtue to convenience.”

    “His plots are often so loosely formed that a very slight
    consideration may improve them.”

    “In many of his plays the latter part is evidently neglected.”

    “He had no regard to distinction of time or place.”

    “In his comic scenes he is seldom very successful when he
    engages his characters in reciprocations of smartness and
    contests of sarcasm.”

    “In tragedy his performance seems constantly to be worse, as
    his labour is more.”

    “In narration he affects a disproportionate pomp of diction and
    a wearisome train of circumlocution, and tells the incident
    imperfectly in many words, which might have been more plainly
    delivered in few.”

    “His declamations or set speeches are commonly cold and weak.”

    “It is incident to him to be now and then entangled with an
    unwieldy sentiment, which he cannot well express and will not
    reject.”

    “What he does best he soon ceases to do.”

    “A quibble is to Shakespeare what luminous vapours are to the
    traveller; he follows it at all adventures.”

    “He neglects the unities—those laws which have been instituted
    and established by the joint authority of poets and critics.”

Johnson proceeds to defend Shakespeare by an excellent demonstration
of the absurdity of the unities, and at the close of it owns himself
“almost frighted at his own temerity.” Then he follows Pope in finding
Shakespeare to be hampered by the age in which he lived. “The English
nation, in the time of Shakespeare, was yet struggling to emerge from
barbarity.” Having to appeal to immature intellects, he was compelled
to base his plays on novels and traditions well known to his audience,
“for his audience could not have followed him through the intricacies
of the drama had they not held the thread of the story in their
hands.” In reply to Voltaire, who expressed wonder that Shakespeare’s
extravagances should be endured by a nation which had seen the tragedy
of _Cato_, Johnson says that “Addison speaks the language of poets, and
Shakespeare of men.” He proceeds to deal with Shakespeare’s learning,
and Shakespeare emerges from the ordeal credited with rather less than
the average board-school boy of the present day. Johnson decides at
length that “if much of his praise is paid by perception and judgment,
much is likewise given by custom and veneration”; and, finally, he
sums up his merits in the following fine sentence:—

    “It therefore is the praise of Shakespeare, that his drama is
    the mirror of life; that he who has mazed his imagination, in
    following the phantoms which other writers raise up before him,
    may here be cured of his delirious ecstasies, by reading human
    sentiments in human language; by scenes from which a hermit may
    estimate the transactions of the world, and a confessor predict
    the progress of the passions.”[19:1]

It is difficult in the face of these pros and cons to determine
what Johnson’s attitude towards Shakespeare really was. Much of his
apparent hostility may, perhaps, be attributed to his instinctive
argumentativeness. It was his nature to object. If he were in a
loquacious mood, you had but to make a bald statement, and he was
upon you with an aggressively persuasive “Why, sir!” And here it may
be that he felt irresistibly impelled to combat the universal opinion
of Shakespeare’s greatness, and that he was hardly sincere in all he
wrote. However this may be, it is probable that he left on his readers
the impression that the balance of his inclination was against rather
than for Shakespeare. The very fact of the judicial attitude would
tend to produce such an impression. A judicial attitude towards
Shakespeare was not at that period so well understood as to be readily
distinguished from unfriendliness. And in estimating the critical
attitude of the age towards Shakespeare, it is necessary to bear in
mind that Dr. Johnson was a more important person when he lived than he
is now. Nothing is gained by speculating what he might have thought.
The fact remains that what he wrote carried weight.

Johnson’s opinion was not, however, sufficiently weighty to make his
preface, as he intended it to be, the last word in Shakespearean
criticism. Other editors followed him. Edward Capell brought much
serious and laborious scholarship to the task; and his judgments were
frequently sound, though his lack of perspicuity in delivering them
detracts somewhat from their value. His edition appeared in 1768. Five
years later, in 1773, George Steevens revised Johnson’s edition, and,
bringing to the enterprise an unrivalled knowledge of Elizabethan
history and literature, embodied many improvements, which he treated
with a humour that was frequently malicious and occasionally obscene.
To the second edition (1778) of this work was added much valuable
material relating to Shakespeare’s biography and the sources of his
plots, due to the researches of Edmund Malone, who published an
edition of his own in 1790. The well-known “First Variorum” edition
appeared in twenty-one volumes in 1803, prepared by Isaac Reed from a
1793 copy of Steevens’, containing many manuscript notes. The “Second
Variorum” appeared in 1813; and the “Third Variorum,” arranged by James
Boswell, the son of Johnson’s biographer, which appeared in 1821, marks
the close of what may be called the eighteenth century period of
commentators.

It will be seen, then, that Shakespeare was at this time kept
prominently before the eyes of the reading public. He was equally a
topic of interest with men of letters who confined themselves to no
special branch of literature. The attitude of the eighteenth century
essayists toward Shakespeare was essentially one of admiration and
respect for his genius. They found fault with his plays, it is true,
frequently enough, but almost always apologetically. He was not
infrequently held up as a model for modern dramatists to follow. The
_Connoisseur_, for example, printed a paper discussing the sources
of the _Merchant of Venice_; and while elaborating the fact that
the plot was borrowed, insisted on the genius displayed in the use
which Shakespeare made of it. The _Guardian_, again, enlarges on the
naturalness of Shakespeare’s characters—remarkable at a time when
poetry was, above all things, rhetorical and artificial.

Let us glance now at the poetical critics. It will be noticed that
many of the pieces printed in the body of this book appear under
names that are not very familiar, and that the eighteenth century is
responsible for the majority of them. In modern anthologies it is not
usual to include selections from the works of such poets; nor, indeed,
if literary excellence be the compiler’s object, is it expedient.
They are included here not because their effusions appear to me to
reach even a modest standard of merit, but because they were accepted
as good poets by their contemporaries and by the literary dictator,
Dr. Johnson. Johnson, it is true, disclaimed responsibility for the
choice of names represented in his edition of British poets, but the
repudiation cannot be considered of much importance. Johnson’s name
had probably more weight with publishers than that of any other man
of his time, and it is hardly likely that his advice in the matter of
inclusion or rejection, had he thought it worth while to give it, would
have been ignored. So one may feel certain that every name on his list
appeared with his approval. The laudatory criticisms embodied in the
biographies, which he asserted marked the extent of his commission,
prove as much. Take Blackmore, for example, whose _Creation_ was
included, on Johnson’s recommendation, in his edition of the poets.
“This poem,” he says, “if he had written nothing else, would have
transmitted him to posterity among the first favourites of the English
Muse.” Posterity, on the whole, has not given the Muse’s favourite much
of a welcome, and Blackmore is one of a number of such chosen ones. But
even Johnson might have known better. They had their reputations ready
made for them by patrons. It was the age of patrons and extravagant
compliment, and Shakespeare in the hands of these small poets took a
place similar to that of the gods and goddesses of Greece and Rome.
Poetical flatterers of great men permitted him to fill the position of
comparative in the scale of eulogy, the object of their praises being
the superlative. Just as the writers of light society compliments made
envious Venus second to Clorinda or Chloe or Celia, so Shakespeare
stood aside to find himself excelled by Addison or Pope or Dryden, or
even, on exceptional occasions, by some patron who scarcely did more
than pretend to throw off little trifles in verse. Witness the “Lines
to Mr. Addison,” by William Somervile:

    “In heaven he [Shakespeare] sings; on earth your muse supplies
     Th’ important loss, and heals our weeping eyes.”

Or take these lines by John Hughes, “To Mr. Addison on his Tragedy of
_Cato_”:

    “Great Shakespeare’s ghost, the solemn strain to hear
     (Methinks I see the laurel’d shade appear!),
     Will hover o’er the scene, and wondering view
     His favourite Brutus rival’d thus by you.”

If one could suppose this to have been written in an ironic vein, the
lines would be satisfactorily pointed; but it is impossible, for Hughes
continues:

    “Such Roman greatness in each action shines,
     Such Roman eloquence adorns your lines,
     That sure the Sibyl’s books this year foretold,
     And in some mystic leaf was found inroll’d,
     Rome, turn thy mournful eyes from Afric’s shore,
     Nor in her sands thy Cato’s tomb explore!
     When thrice six hundred times the circling sun
     His annual race shall through the zodiac run,
     An isle remote his monument shall rear,
     And every generous Briton pay a tear.”

Or take the following by William Pattison, “To Mr. John Saunders,
occasioned by a sight of some of his paintings at Cambridge.” It would
be difficult to imagine a more incongruous bracketing of names than
that in the sixth line. The italics are my own:

    “When Nature, from her unexhausted mine,
     Resolves to make some mighty science shine;
     Her embryo seeds inform the future birth,
     Improve the soul, and animate the earth;
     From thence, an Homer, or Apelles rise,
     _A Shakespeare, or a Saunders_, strike our eyes,
     And, lo! the promis’d wonder charms my view,
     The old Apelles rivall’d in the new!”

One might quote pages of such stuff—torrents of heroic couplets—whose
very form, apart from their sentiment, show that Shakespeare was deemed
rather out of date. But the mention of his name counts for something.
It means that all of these poets felt, as Dr. Johnson felt, that though
they were not quite in sympathy with the old Elizabethan playwright, he
was still some one to be reckoned with. Indeed, every now and then the
truth comes out that he was too much for them. William Whitehead, for
one, had a full appreciation of him.

    “O for a Shakespeare’s pencil, while I trace
     In nature’s breathing paint, the dreary waste
     Of Buxton” . . .

he sighs in _An Hymn to the Nymph of Bristol_; and, for all the bathos
of its expression, the admiration is genuine.

William Hamilton wrote _A Soliloquy in Imitation of Hamlet_, a
paraphrase of the famous speech, almost as bald as that from which
Shakespeare copied his. But the effort is doubtless more of a literary
exercise than an attempt at improvement of the original, for Hamilton
shows at various points in his works a fairly intimate knowledge and
real regard for Shakespeare’s genius.

Mallet read his Shakespeare intelligently, as witness his _Edwin and
Emma_, a love ballad, with its text taken from _Twelfth Night_. And
William Shenstone shows the right spirit in this very passable stanza
from _The Schoolmistress_, happily describing a village school:

    “Yet nurs’d with skill, what dazzling fruits appear!
       Ev’n now sagacious foresight points to show
     A little bench of heedless bishops here,
       And there a chancellor in embryo,
       Or bard sublime, if bard may e’er be so,
     As Milton, Shakespeare, names that ne’er shall die!
       Though now he crawl along the ground so low,
     Nor weeting how the muse shall soar on high,
     Wishes, poor starveling elf! his paper kite to fly.”

That is well meaning and temperate enough, but some of these writers
erred on the side of enthusiasm. The following passage from Robert
Lloyd’s _Shakespeare, an Epistle to Mr. Garrick_, may be quoted as an
example:

    “Oh, where’s the bard, who at one view
     Could look the whole creation through,
     Who travers’d all the human heart,
     Without recourse to Grecian art?
     He scorn’d the modes of imitation,
     Of altering, pilfering, and translation;
     Nor painted horror, grief, or rage,
     From models of a former age;
     The bright original he took,
     And tore the leaf from nature’s book.
     ’Tis Shakespeare, thus, who stands alone.”

It will be noted that this effusion approaches Shakespeare through
Garrick; and such is the case with many others that must remain
unquoted. The reason is that Garrick occupied, by public consent if
not by his own desire, the position of Shakespeare’s patron. He took,
for instance, a leading part in organising the Shakespeare jubilee
at Stratford-on-Avon. Among his enterprises on this occasion was the
issue of a volume of tributes to Shakespeare, containing several
poetical pieces by himself, distinguished rather for their enthusiasm
than for poetical inspiration. Dr. Johnson opened the book with some
light verses, addressed to The Fair in a vein of somewhat elephantine
playfulness; and Garrick collected into it a number of extracts from
various writers, in verse and prose, in praise of Shakespeare,
prefacing the whole with a high-flown effort of his own in heroic
couplets, and publishing it in handsome quarto.

In the garden of his house at Hampton, Garrick had a temple dedicated
to Shakespeare, and adorned with statuary, of which the chief piece, a
fine full-length figure by Roubiliac, is now in the entrance hall of
the British Museum. But to do him justice, his efforts, though they
carried the manner of the playhouse into private life, were conceived
in a spirit of genuine appreciation; and if many of his admirers
regarded him almost as the rescuer of Shakespeare from oblivion, he, at
any rate, was ready to acknowledge his indebtedness to the dramatist on
the presentation of whose characters his well-merited fame rested.

So much for the second period.[26:1] Its literature is like a troubled
sea of conflicting opinion, through which the ship of Shakespeare’s
genius sails, tossed and buffeted by winds fair and foul, from all
points of the compass, and emerges triumphant.


V

THE THIRD PERIOD

In the foregoing brief survey I have endeavoured to indicate in the
broadest manner possible the principal forces that affected the
opinions concerning Shakespeare held during the eighteenth century—the
chief boulders, so to say, round which the current of opinion swirled.
No such analysis seems necessary in dealing with the nineteenth
century. That is, comparatively speaking, smooth water. The poetic
reformation inaugurated by Wordsworth and Coleridge, who published
their _Lyrical Ballads_ in 1798, practically effaced the classic
traditions of the previous hundred years, and prepared a way for the
school of æsthetic criticism which set Shakespeare in the place which
he now holds.

Æsthetic criticism, of a kind, was not entirely unknown. So far
back, for instance, as 1736, an anonymous pamphlet appeared with the
title, _Some Remarks on the Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark_.
The author is an enthusiastic admirer of “the greatest tragic writer
that ever lived (except Sophocles and Euripides),” though most of the
beauties which he points out would be obvious to a reader of average
intelligence, and his expositions lack insight. Such efforts were, in
fact, nothing more than academic recreation, and but for their evidence
of a right tendency are hardly worthy of mention. In effect they were,
of course, immeasurably distant from the work of the æsthetic critics
of the early nineteenth century. Coleridge spoke truly when he thus
described his achievement:

    “However inferior in ability I may be to some who have followed
    me, I own I am proud that I was the first in time who publicly
    demonstrated to the full extent of the position, that the
    supposed irregularity and extravagances of Shakespeare were the
    mere dreams of a pedantry that arraigned the eagle because it
    had not the dimensions of the swan.”[28:1]

One has but to mention Hazlitt as Coleridge’s co-worker to feel that
Shakespeare’s position can never be seriously called in question.

In the mass of literature, much of it excellent, that has sprung from
this beginning, two works only—in English prose—are so pre-eminent as
to demand mention here, Mr. Swinburne’s _Study of Shakespeare_ (1880),
and Professor Dowden’s _Shakespeare, his Mind and Art_ (1874). Of
these, Mr. Swinburne’s book astounds one with a flow of eulogistic
rhetoric that can only be compared with the marvellous piece of
inspired enthusiasm on the same subject by Victor Hugo.

In nineteenth century verse Shakespeare’s name appears comparatively
seldom, excepting in poems written directly in his honour. This is a
logical result of the change from the poetic manner of the eighteenth
century, and the abandonment of the poetry of direct didacticism.
The characteristic poetry of the nineteenth century was as different
from that of the eighteenth century as the pictures of Turner were
from those of the English pre-Raphaelites. That is to say, the
typical poetry of the earlier age was marked by a clean symmetry, a
clearness of imagery, and a sharpness of detail paralleled in some
degree by the pictures of the pre-Raphaelites; whereas the poetry of
the nineteenth century leaned more to imaginative embroidery, and
what one may call, perhaps, the indefiniteness occasioned by artistic
introspection. It was, in fact, very much in the nature of a change
from a public oration to a private soliloquy. Even the mention, in
nineteenth century poetry, of a great man’s name to typify in a measure
the greatness of his country, is unusual. In Wordsworth’s sonnet, “It
is not to be thought of,” for example, the names of Shakespeare and
Milton come as something of a surprise from the poet who did most to
introduce the nineteenth century school of poetry. It is curious to
note that here the poet unconsciously imitates the manner of the verse
from which he deemed it his mission to effect a change; this sonnet
is, indeed, curiously typical of the period of poetic reformation in
which it was composed; for, though it belongs distinctly to the new
school, it possesses in the references to Shakespeare and Milton one
of the prominent characteristics of eighteenth century poetry. Thus,
though the poetry of the third period contains poems of the highest
order in direct praise of Shakespeare, as witness the sonnets of Mr.
Swinburne and Matthew Arnold, it is apparent that the anthologist
will find the greater part of his material in the works of prose
writers. At first glance one is bewildered by the mass of literature
which presents itself, but the scheme of this collection goes a small
way towards simplifying the choice. Pieces dealing with particular
merits of Shakespeare have generally been rejected, so that studies
of characters in the plays find no place. Similarly, studies, such,
for example, as De Quincey’s fine psychological analysis of the
knocking at the gate in _Macbeth_, have been excluded. Still, even
with these limitations, one feels that the task of selection is
beset with dangers. Every reader of Shakespearean literature has his
favourite passages, and though I have endeavoured to judge with a just
catholicity, I present the result of my labours in all meekness.


VI

SCHEME OF THE BOOK

The extracts have been arranged in three divisions. The first, which is
subdivided into three periods, corresponding with those described in
the foregoing notes, contains pieces in direct praise of Shakespeare.

The second part of the work contains brief passages in prose and verse
similar in character to those in the first part, but selected either
for their epigrammatic terseness or for their crystallisation of a fine
thought that is conveniently detachable from its context.

The third part is devoted to pieces which treat Shakespeare or his
works from a romantic standpoint. The devotion of only a small space to
this section was inevitable, and I regret the number of omissions. One
especially must be mentioned. Landor’s witty _Citation and Examination
of William Shakespeare_ on the charge of deer stealing, represents
exactly the kind of piece which I aimed at including. It is, however,
far too long to quote in full, and the interest is so deftly carried
throughout that I have found it quite impossible to select any portion
which could stand intelligibly by itself. I should have liked, also,
to include Browning’s poem, _At the Mermaid_, but here the question of
copyright intervened.

The dates immediately following the authors’ names show (sometimes
approximately) the earliest years with which the pieces quoted can be
definitely associated. Occasionally they mark the year in which the
piece was written, but in the majority of cases the year is that of
publication.

My best thanks are due to the following authors and publishers, who
have kindly given me permission to use copyright pieces:—Mr. A.
C. Swinburne, Mr. W. M. Rossetti, Mr. Gerald Massey, Mr. Theodore
Watts-Dunton, Mr. William Watson, Mr. Richard Watson Gilder, Mr. W.
S. Gilbert, Dr. Ludwig Mond (Mathilde Blind), Messrs. Macmillan & Co.
(Francis Turner Palgrave, Matthew Arnold, and John Henry Newman),
Messrs. Ellis & Elvey (Dante Gabriel Rossetti), Messrs. George Allen &
Son (John Ruskin), Messrs. Smith Elder & Co. (Robert Browning).

Finally, it is my pleasant duty to record my deep indebtedness to Mr.
Sidney Lee, at whose suggestion this book was undertaken.

                                                         C. E. H.


FOOTNOTES:

[5:1] I can myself add nothing but suggestions of possible borrowings
from Shakespearean diction. In the poem, _The Court Burlesqu’d_,
printed in Samuel Butler’s _Remains_, the lines—

    “This, by a rat behind the curtain
     Has been o’erheard, some say for certain,”

may be reminiscent of the scene in _Hamlet_ in which Polonius is
killed; and in Quarles’ _Argalus and Parthenia_, the expression “to
gild perfection,” which occurs in the 21st line of the first book,
seems to echo the passage in _King John_, “to gild refined gold, to
paint the lily,” etc.

[10:1] In 1756.

[19:1] Johnson several times expresses himself in a like spirit in his
_Rambler_:

“It may be doubtful whether from all his successors more maxims of
theoretical knowledge, or more rules of practical prudence, can be
collected than he alone has given to his country.”—_Works_, v. 131.

“He that has read Shakespeare with attention will, perhaps, find little
new in the crowded world.”—_Ib._ 434.

“Let him that is yet unacquainted with the powers of Shakespeare, and
who desires to feel the highest pleasure that the drama can give, read
every play, from the first scene to the last, with utter negligence of
all his commentators. When his fancy is on the wing, let it not stoop
at correction or explanation.”—_Ib._ 152.

[26:1] A word may be said here of the eighteenth century anthologists.
Collections of poems were numerous. That by Dodsley, with its
supplement prepared by Pearch, contains nothing by Shakespeare, nor
indeed does Nichols’ collection, which claimed to include no poem
that had been printed in the volumes issued by Dodsley or Pearch. A
collection by Thomas Tomkins, entitled _Poems on Various Subjects:
selected to enforce the Practice of Virtue, and with a View to comprise
in One Volume the Beauties of English Poetry_ (1787), goes no farther
back than Milton; and the well-known anthology, _Select Beauties of
Ancient English Poetry_, with remarks by Henry Headley, contains such
names as Drayton, Warner, Drummond, Raleigh, Surrey, Carew, Wyat,
and Browne, but Shakespeare finds no place. He does not, in fact,
enter regularly collections of this kind until the beginning of the
nineteenth century—the period of “Elegant Extracts.” But he is quoted
frequently enough in Edward Bysshe’s _Art of English Poetry_ (1724);
and John Bowle, in his _Miscellaneous Pieces of Ancient English Poetry_
(1765), selects from _King John_.

[28:1] _Literary Remains_ (1836), vol. ii. p. 63.




PART I

“THESE THREE HUNDRED YEARS”

    Any time these three hundred years.

                                         _Merry Wives_, I. i. 13.


    When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
      And broils root out the work of masonry,
    Nor Mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn
      The living record of your memory.
    ’Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
      Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room,
    Even in the eyes of all posterity
      That wear this world out to the ending doom.

                                                     _Sonnet LV._




THE FIRST PERIOD

SIXTEENTH AND SEVENTEENTH CENTURIES


FRANCIS MERES, 1596

(1565-1647)

As the soul of Euphorbus was thought to live in Pythagoras, so the
sweet witty soul of Ovid lives in mellifluous and honey-tongued
Shakespeare, witness his “Venus and Adonis,” his “Lucrece,” his sugared
sonnets among his private friends, etc.

As Plautus and Seneca are accounted the best for Comedy and Tragedy
among the Latins, so Shakespeare among the English is the most
excellent in both kinds for the stage; for Comedy, witness his
“Gentlemen of Verona,” his “Errors,” his “Love’s Labour’s Lost,”
his “Love’s Labour’s Wonne,” his “Midsummer Night’s Dream,” and his
“Merchant of Venice”; for Tragedy, his “Richard the 2,” “Richard the
3,” “Henry the 4,” “King John,” “Titus Andronicus,” and his “Romeo and
Juliet.”

As Epius Stolo said that the Muses would speak with Plautus’ tongue,
if they would speak Latin; so I say that the Muses would speak with
Shakespeare’s fine filed phrase, if they would speak English.

                 _Palladis Tamia. Wits Treasury, Being the Second
                     Part of Wits Commonwealth._ 1598.


RICHARD BARNFIELD, 1598

(1574-1627)

“_A Remembrance of some English Poets._”

    And Shakespeare thou, whose honey-flowing Vein
    (Pleasing the World), thy Praises doth obtain.
    Whose _Venus_, and whose _Lucrece_ (sweet, and chaste)
    Thy Name in Fame’s immortal Book have placed.
      Live ever you, at least in Fame live ever:
      Well may the Body die, but Fame dies never.

                   _Poems in Divers humors._ 1598. Sig. E2, back.


JOHN WEEVER, 1599

(1576-1632)

“_Ad Gulielmum Shakespeare._”

    Honey-tongued Shakespeare, when I saw thine issue,
      I swore Apollo got them and none other;
    Their rosy-tinted features clothed in tissue,
      Some heaven-born goddess said to be their mother:
    Rose-cheeked _Adonis_, with his amber tresses,
      Fair fire-hot _Venus_, charming him to love her,
    Chaste _Lucretia_, virgin-like her dresses,
      Proud lust-stung _Tarquin_, seeking still to prove her:
    Romeo, Richard; more whose names I know not,
      Their sugared tongues, and power attractive beauty
    Say they are saints, although that saints they show not,
      For thousands vow to them subjective duty:
    They burn in love, thy children, Shakespeare het them,     [heated
    Go, woo thy Muse, more Nymphish brood beget them.

              _Epigrammes in the oldest Cut, and newest Fashion._
                  John Weever. 1599. Epig. 22.

    Some bibliographers have assigned the first edition of Weever’s
    _Epigrammes_ to the year 1595, but no copy bearing that date is
    known.


JOHN DAVIES, 1610

(1565?-1618)

“_To our English Terence, Mr. Will. Shakespeare._”

    Some say, good Will, which I in sport do sing,
      Had’st thou not play’d some kingly parts in sport,
    Thou had’st been a companion for a king,
      And been a king among the meaner sort.
    Some others rail; but rail as they think fit,
    Thou hast no railing, but a reigning wit:
      And honesty thou sow’st which they do reap;
      So, to increase their stock which they do keep:

                  _The Scourge of Folly, consisting of Satyricall
                      Epigramms and others._ 1611.


THOMAS FREEMAN, 1614

(_fl._ 1614)

“_To Master W. Shakespeare._”

    Shakespeare, that nimble Mercury thy brain
      Lulls many hundred Argus-eyes asleep,
    So fit, for all thou fashionest thy rein,
      At th’ horse-foot fountain thou hast drank full deep,
    Vertues or vices theme to thee all one is:
      Who loves chaste life, there’s _Lucrece_ for a Teacher:
    Who but read lust there’s _Venus and Adonis_,
      True model of a most lascivious leacher.
    Besides in plays thy wit winds like Meander:
      Whence needy new-composers borrow more
    Than Terence doth from Plautus or Menander.
      But to praise thee aright I want thy store:
        Then let thine own works thine own worth upraise,
        And help t’ adorn thee with deserved Bays.

                    _Runne, and a Great Caste. The Second Bowle._
                        (_Being the second part of a Rubbe, and
                        a Great Cast_, 1614.) Epigram 92, Sig.
                        K2, back.


WILLIAM BASSE, 1622

(_d._ 1653?)

“_On Mr. William Shakespeare._”

    Renowned Spenser lie a thought more nigh
    To learned Beaumont, and rare Beaumont lie
    A little nearer Chaucer, to make room
    For Shakespeare in your threefold, fourfold tomb.
    To lodge all four in one bed make a shift
    Until Doom’s day, for hardly will (a) fift
    Betwixt this day and that by fate be slain,
    For whom the curtains shall be drawn again.
    For if precedency in death do bar
    A fourth place in your sacred sepulchre,
    In this uncarved marble of thy own,
    Sleep, brave Tragedian, Shakespeare, sleep alone;
    Thy unmolested rest, unshared cave,
    Possess as lord, not tenant, to the grave,
      That unto others it may counted be
      Honour hereafter to be layed by thee.

                  _Fennell’s Shakespere Repository_, 1853, p. 10.
                      Printed from a MS. _temp._ Charles I.


ANONYMOUS, 1623

    _Judicio Pylium, genio Socratem, arte Maronem, Terra tegit,
        populus maeret, Olympus habet._

    Stay, passenger, who goest thou by so fast?
    Read, if thou canst, whom envious death hath placed
    Within this monument; Shakespeare with whom
    Quick nature died; whose name doth deck this tomb
    Far more than cost; sith all that he hath writ
    Leaves living art but page to serve his wit.

             Inscription on the Monument erected to Shakespeare’s
                 Memory in the Parish Church at Stratford-on-Avon.
                 1623.


BEN JONSON, 1623

(1573-1637)

    “_To the memory of my beloved, the Author, Mr. William
        Shakespeare: and what he hath left us._”

    To draw no envy, Shakespeare, on thy name,
    Am I thus ample to thy book, and fame:
    While I confess thy writings to be such,
    As neither Man, nor Muse, can praise too much.
    ’Tis true, and all men’s suffrage. But these ways
    Were not the paths I meant unto thy praise:
    For seeliest Ignorance on these may light,
    Which, when it sounds at best, but echoes right;
    Or blind Affection, which doth ne’er advance
    The truth, but gropes, and urgeth all by chance;
    Or crafty Malice, might pretend this praise,
    And think to ruin, where it seem’d to raise . . .
    But thou art proof against them, and in deed
    Above th’ ill fortune of them, or the need.
    I, therefore, will begin. Soul of the age!
    The applause! delight! the wonder of our stage!
    My Shakespeare, rise; I will not lodge thee by
    Chaucer, or Spenser, or bid Beaumont lie
    A little further to make thee a room:
    Thou art a monument, without a tomb,
    And art alive still, while thy book doth live,
    And we have wits to read, and praise to give.
    That I not mix thee so, my brain excuses;
    I mean with great, but disproportion’d Muses:
    For, if I thought my judgment were of years,
    I should commit thee surely with thy peers,
    And tell how for thou didst our Lyly out-shine,
    Or sporting Kid, or Marlowe’s mighty line.
    And though thou hadst small Latin, and less Greek,
    From thence to honour thee, I would not seek
    For names; but call forth thundering Æschilus,
    Euripides, and Sophocles to us,
    Paccuvius, Accius, him of Cordova dead,
    To life again, to hear thy buskin tread,
    And shake a stage: or, when thy socks were on,
    Leave thee alone, for the comparison
    Of all that insolent Greece or haughty Rome
    Sent forth, or since did from their ashes come.
    Triumph, my Britain, thou hast one to show,
    To whom all scenes of Europe homage owe.
    He was not of an age, but for all time!
    And all the Muses still were in their prime,
    When like Apollo he came forth to warm
    Our ears, or like a Mercury to charm!
    Nature herself was proud of his designs,
    And joy’d to wear the dressing of his lines!
    Which were so richly spun, and woven so fit,
    As, since, she will vouchsafe no other wit.
    The merry Greek, tart Aristophanes,
    Neat Terence, witty Plautus, now not please;
    But antiquated and deserted lie
    As they were not of Nature’s family.
    Yet must I not give Nature all: thy Art,
    My gentle Shakespeare, must enjoy a part.
    For though the Poet’s matter, Nature be,
    His Art doth give the fashion. And, that he,
    Who casts to write a living line, must sweat
    (Such as thine are), and strike the second heat
    Upon the Muse’s anvil: turn the same
    (And himself in it) that he thinks to frame;
    Or for the laurel, he may gain a scorn,
    For a good Poet’s made, as well as born.
    And such wert thou. Look how the father’s face
    Lives in his issue, even so, the race
    Of Shakespeare’s mind and manners brightly shines
    In his well turned and true-filed lines:
    In each of which he seems to shake a lance,
    As brandish’d at the eyes of Ignorance.
    Sweet Swan of Avon! what a sight it were
    To see thee in our waters yet appear,
    And make those flights upon the banks of Thames,
    That so did take Eliza, and our James!
    But stay, I see thee in the hemisphere
    Advanced, and made a constellation there!
    Shine forth, thou Star of Poets, and with rage,
    Or influence, chide, or cheer the drooping Stage;
    Which, since thy flight from hence, hath mourn’d like night,
    And despairs day, but for thy volume’s light.

             Prefixed to the First Folio Edition of Shakespeare’s
                 _Works_.


          . . . “I will not lodge thee by
    Chaucer, or Spenser, or bid Beaumont lie
    A little further to make thee a room.”

                                        See William Basse, p. 40.


HUGH HOLLAND, 1623

(_d._ 1633)

    “_Upon the Lines and Life of the famous Scenick Poet, Master
        William Shakespeare._”

    Those hands, which you so clapt, go now, and wring
        You Britain’s brave; for done are Shakespeare’s days:
        His days are done, that made the dainty Plays,
    Which make the Globe of heav’n and earth to ring.
    Dried is that vein, dried is the Thespian Spring,
        Turn’d all to tears, and Phœbus clouds his rays:
        That corpse, that coffin now bestick those bayes,
    Which crown’d him Poet first, then Poet’s King.
    If Tragedies might any Prologue have,
        All those he made, would scarce make one to this:
    Where Fame, now that he gone is to the grave
        (Death’s public tiring-house), the Nuncius is.
    For though his line of life went soon about,
    The life yet of his lines shall never out.

             Prefixed to the First Folio Edition of Shakespeare’s
                 _Works_.


JOHN HEMINGE, 1623

(_d._ 1630)

HENRIE CONDELL

(_d._ 1627)

“_To the great Variety of Readers._”

His mind and hand went together: and what he thought he uttered with
that easiness, that we have scarce received from him a blot in his
papers. But it is not our province, who only gather his works, and give
them you, to praise him. It is yours that read him. And there we hope,
to your divers capacities, you will find enough, both to draw, and
hold you: for his wit can no more lie hid, than it could be lost. Read
him, therefore; and again, and again: and if then you do not like him,
surely you are in some manifest danger, not to understand him. And so
we leave you to other of his friends, whom, if you need, can be your
guides: if you need them not, you can lead yourselves, and others. And
such readers we wish him.

                   Address prefixed to the First Folio Edition of
                       Shakespeare’s _Works_. 1623.


LEONARD DIGGES, 1623

(1588-1635)

“_To the Memorie of the deceased Author, Maister W. Shakespeare._”

    Shakespeare, at length thy pious fellows give
    The world thy Works: thy Works, by which, out-live
    Thy Tomb, thy name must: when that stone is rent,
    And Time dissolves thy Stratford Monument,
    Here we alive shall view thee still. This Book,
    When brass and marble fade, shall make thee look
    Fresh to all ages: when posterity
    Shall loath what’s new, thinke all is prodigy
    That is not Shakespeare’s; ev’ry line, each verse,
    Here shall revive, redeem thee from thy hearse.
    Nor fire, nor cankering age, as Naso said,
    Of his, thy wit-fraught Book, shall once invade.
    Nor shall I e’er believe, or think thee dead
    (Though missed), until our bankrout Stage be sped
    (Impossible) with some new strain t’ out-do
    Passions of Juliet, and her Romeo;
    Or till I hear a scene more nobly take,
    Then when thy half-sword parlying Romans spake,
    Till these, till any of thy Volumes rest
    Shall with more fire, more feeling be expressed,
    Be sure, our Shakespeare, thou canst never die,
    But crown’d with laurel, live eternally.

                           Prefixed to the First Folio Edition of
                               Shakespeare’s _Works_. 1623.


MICHAEL DRAYTON, 1627

(1563-1631)

    “_To my most dearly-loved friend Henery Reynolds, Esquire, of
        Poets and Poesie._”

    Shakespeare, thou hadst as smooth a comic vein,
    Fitting the sock, and in thy natural brain,
    As strong conception, and as clear a rage
    As any one that trafick’d with the stage.

               Elegies at the end of _The Battaile of Agincourt_.
                   1627, p. 206.


JOHN MILTON, 1630

(1608-1674)

“_An Epitaph on the Admirable Dramatic Poet, W. Shakespeare._”

    What needs my Shakespeare for his honour’d bones,
    The labour of an age in pilèd stones?
    Or that his hallow’d relics should be hid
    Under a star-ypointing pyramid?
    Dear son of Memory, great heir of Fame,
    What need’st thou such weak witness of thy name?
    Thou, in our wonder and astonishment,
    Hast built thyself a life-long monument.
    For whilst, to the shame of slow-endeavouring art,
    Thy easy numbers flow; and that each heart
    Hath, from the leaves of thy unvalued book,
    Those Delphic lines with deep impression took;
    Then thou, our fancy of itself bereaving,
    Dost make us marble with too much conceiving;
    And, so sepulchr’d, in such pomp dost lie,
    That kings, for such a tomb should wish to die.

                Prefixed to Second Folio Edition of Shakespeare’s
                    _Works_. 1632.


I. M. S., 1632

“_On worthy Master Shakespeare and his Poems._”

    A mind reflecting ages past, whose clear
    And equal surface can make things appear
    Distant a thousand years, and represent
    Them in their lively colours’ just extent.
    To outrun hasty time, retrieve the fates,
    Roll back the heavens, blow ope the iron gates
    Of death and Lethe, where (confused) lie
    Great heaps of ruinous mortality.
    In that deep dusky dungeon to discern
    A royal ghost from churls: by art to learn
    The physiognomy of shades, and give
    Them sudden birth, wond’ring how oft they live.
    What story coldly tells, what poets feign
    At second hand, and picture without brain
    Senseless and soulless shows. To give a stage
    (Ample and true with life) voice, action, age,
    As Plato’s year and new scene of the world
    Them unto us, or us to them had hurl’d.
    To raise our ancient sovereigns from their herse,
    Make kings his subjects, by exchanging verse
    Enlive their pale trunks, that the present age
    Joys in their joy, and trembles at their rage:
    Yet so to temper passion, that our ears
    Take pleasure in their pain; and eyes in tears
    Both weep and smile; fearful at plots so sad,
    Then, laughing at our fear; abus’d, and glad
    To be abus’d, affected with that truth
    Which we perceive is false; pleas’d in that ruth
    At which we start; and by elaborate play
    Tortur’d and tickled; by a crablike way
    Time past made pastime, and in ugly sort
    Disgorging up his ravaine for our sport—
    —While the Plebeian Imp, from lofty throne,
    Creates and rules a world, and works upon
    Mankind by secret engines; now to move
    A chilling pity, then a rigorous love:
    To strike up and stroke down, both joy and ire;
    To steer th’ affections; and by heavenly fire
    Mould us anew. Stol’n from ourselves—
      This, and much more which cannot be express’d,
    But by himself, his tongue and his own breast,
    Was Shakespeare’s freehold, which his cunning brain
    Improv’d by favour of the ninefold train.
    The buskin’d Muse, the Comic Queen, the grand
    And louder tone of Clio; nimble hand,
    And nimbler foot of the melodious pair,
    The silver voiced Lady; the most fair
    Calliope, whose speaking silence daunts,
    And she whose praise the heavenly body chants.
      These jointly woo’d him, envying one another
    (Obey’d by all as spouse, but lov’d as brother),
    And wrought a curious robe of sable grave,
    Fresh green, and pleasant yellow, red most brave,
    And constant blue, rich purple, guiltless white,
    The lowly russet, and the scarlet bright;
    Branch’d and embroider’d like the painted Spring,
    Each leaf match’d with a flower, and each string
    Of golden wire, each line of silk; there run
    Italian works whose thread the Sisters spun;
    And there did sing, or seem to sing, the choice
    Birds of a foreign note and various voice.
    Here hangs a mossy rock; there plays a fair
    But chiding fountain purled; not the air,
    Nor clouds nor thunder, but were living drawn,
    Not out of common tiffany or lawn,
    But fine materials, which the Muses know,
    And only know the countries where they grow.
    Now, when they could no longer him enjoy
    In mortal garments pent, death may destroy,
    They say, his body, but his verse shall live;
    And more than nature takes, our hands shall give.
    In a less volume, but more strongly bound,
    Shakespeare shall breath and speak, with laurel crown’d
    Which never fades. Fed with Ambrosian meat,
    In a well-lined vesture rich and neat.
      So with this robe they clothe him, bid him wear it;
      For time shall never stain, nor envy tear it.

                 The friendly admirer of his Endowments, I. M. S.
                 Prefixed to the Second Folio Edition of
                     Shakespeare’s _Works_. 1632.

    Conjectures as to the authorship of this poem have been
    numerous. Coleridge in his _Lectures on Shakespeare_ says:
    “This poem is subscribed I. M. S., meaning, as some have
    explained, the initials “John Milton, Student”: the internal
    evidence seems to us decisive; for there was, I think, no
    other man, of that particular day, capable of writing anything
    so characteristic of Shakespeare, so justly thought, and so
    happily expressed.”


JOHN HALES, BEFORE 1633

(1584-1656)

In a conversation between Sir John Suckling, Sir William D’Avenant,
Endymion Porter, Mr. Hales of Eton, and Ben Jonson, Sir John Suckling,
who was a professed admirer of Shakespeare, had undertaken his defence
against Ben Jonson with some warmth. Mr. Hales, who had sat still for
some time, hearing Ben frequently reproaching him with the want of
learning, and ignorance of the ancients, told him at last, “That if
Mr. Shakespeare had not read the ancients, he had likewise not stolen
anything from ’em [a fault the other made no conscience of]; and that
if he would produce any one topic finely treated by any of them, he
would undertake to show something upon the same subject at least as
well written by Shakespeare.”

             Some Account of the Life of Mr. William Shakespeare,
                 prefixed to the edition of his _Works_ by
                 Nicholas Rowe, 1709, vol. i. p. xiv.


SIR WILLIAM D’AVENANT, 1637

(1606-1668)

“_Ode. In Remembrance of Master William Shakespeare._”


1

    Beware (delighted Poets!) when you sing
    To welcome Nature in the early Spring;
            Your num’rous feet not tread
    The Banks of Avon; for each flower
    (As it ne’er knew a sun or shower)
            Hangs there the pensive head.


2

    Each tree whose thick and spreading growth hath made
    Rather a night beneath the boughs, than shade
            (Unwilling now to grow),
    Looks like the plume a captive wears
    Whose rifled falls are steept i’ th’ tears
            Which from his last rage flow.


3

    The piteous river wept itself away
    Long since (alas!) to such a swift decay;
            That reach the map; and look
    If you a river there can spy;
    And for a river your mock’d eye
            Will find a shallow brook.

                     _Madagascar, with other Poems._ 1638, p. 37.
                         Printed 1637.


ANONYMOUS, ABOUT 1637

“_An Elegie on the Death of that famous Writer and Actor, Mr. William
Shakspeare._”

    I dare not do thy memory that wrong,
    Unto our larger griefs to give a tongue;
    I’ll only sigh in earnest, and let fall
    My solemn tears at thy great funeral;
    For every eye that rains a show’r for thee,
    Laments thy loss in a sad elegy.
    Nor is it fit each humble Muse should have
    Thy worth his subject, now th’ art laid in grave;
    No, it’s a flight beyond the pitch of those,
    Whose worthless pamphlets are not sense in prose.
    Let learned Jonson sing a Dirge for thee,
    And fill our Orb with mournful harmony:
    But we need no remembrancer; thy fame
    Shall still accompany thy honoured name
    To all posterity; and make us be
    Sensible of what we lost in losing thee:
    Being the age’s wonder, whose smooth rhymes
    Did more reform than lash the looser times.
    Nature herself did her own self admire,
    As oft as thou wert pleased to attire
    Her in her native lustre, and confess
    Thy dressing was her chiefest comliness.
    How can we then forget thee, when the age
    Her chiefest tutor, and the widowed stage
    Her only favourite in thee hath lost,
    And Nature’s self what she did brag of most?
    Sleep then, rich soul of numbers, whilst poor we
    Enjoy the profits of thy legacy;
    And thinke it happiness enough we have
    So much of thee redeemèd from the grave,
    As may suffice to enlighten future times
    With the bright lustre of thy matchless rhymes.

                 Appended to Shakespeare’s _Poems_. 1640. Sig. L.


THOMAS BANCROFT, 1639

(_fl._ 1633-1658)

“_To Shakespeare._”

    Thy Muse’s sugared dainties seem to us
    Like the fam’d apples of old Tantalus:
    For we, admiring, see and hear thy strains;
    But none I see or hear, those sweets attains.


“_To the same._”

    Thou hast so us’d thy pen (or shook thy spear),
    That Poets startle, nor thy wit come near.

                  _Two Bookes of Epigrammes, and Epitaphs._ 1639.
                      Nos. 118 and 119.


GEORGE DANIEL, 1647

(1616-1657)

    The sweetest Swan of Avon, to ye fair
      And cruel Delia, passionately sings;
    Other men’s weaknesses and follies are
      Honour and wit to him; each accent brings
    A sprig to crown him Poet; and contrive
    A monument, in his own work, to live.

           _Poems. Vindication of Poesie._ Add. MS. 19255, p. 17.
               (British Museum.) Privately printed by Dr.
               Grosart. 1878, 4 vols. Vol. i. pp. 28, 29.


SAMUEL SHEPPARD, 1651

(_fl. c._ 1606-1652)

“_In Memory of our Famous Shakespeare._”


1

    Sacred spirit, whiles thy Lyre
      Echoed o’er the Arcadian Plains,
    Even Apollo did admire,
      Orpheus wondered at thy strains.


2

    Plautus sigh’d, Sophocles wept
      Tears of anger, for to hear,
    After they so long had slept,
      So bright a genius should appear.


3

    Who wrote his Lines with a sun-beam,
      More durable than Time or Fate;
    Others boldly do blaspheme,
      Like those that seem to preach, but prate.


4

    Thou wert truly priest elect,
      Chosen darling to the Nine;
    Such a trophy to erect
      By thy wit and skill divine.


5

    That were all their other glories
      (Thine excepted) torn away,
    By thy admirable stories,
      Their garments ever shall be gay.


6

    Where thy honoured bones do lie
      (As Statius once to Maro’s urn),
    Thither every year will I
      Slowly tread, and sadly mourn.

            _Epigrams Theological, Philosophical, and Romantick._
                Six Books, etc., with other Select Poems. 1651.
                Book vi. Epig. 17, pp. 150, 152, 154.


THOMAS FULLER, _c._ 1661

(1608-1661)

He was an eminent instance of the truth of that rule, _Poeta non fit
sed nascitur_; one is not _made_, but _born_ a poet. Indeed, his
learning was very little, so that, as Cornish diamonds are not polished
by any lapidary, but are pointed and smoothed even as they are taken
out of the earth, so nature itself was all the _art_ which was used
upon him.

Many were the wit-combats betwixt him and Ben Jonson; which two I
behold like a Spanish great galleon and an English man of war: Master
Jonson (like the former) was built far higher in learning; solid, but
slow in his performances. Shakespeare, with the English man of war,
lesser in bulk, but lighter in sailing, could turn with all tides, tack
about, and take advantage of all winds, by the quickness of his wit and
invention.

                         _The History of the Worthies of England:
                             Warwickshire._ 1662, p. 126.


SAMUEL PEPYS, 1662-1667

(1633-1703)

1661-1662. March 1st. My wife and I by coach, first to see my little
picture that is a-drawing, and thence to the Opera, and there saw
“Romeo and Juliet,” the first time it was ever acted, but it is a play
of itself the worst that ever I heard, and the worst acts that ever I
saw these people do, and I am resolved to go no more to see the first
time of acting, for they were all of them out more or less.

1662. September 29th. To the King’s Theatre, where we saw “Midsummer
Night’s Dream,” which I had never seen before, nor ever shall again,
for it is the most insipid, ridiculous play that ever I saw in my life.

1666. December 28th. To the Duke’s House, and there saw “Macbeth” most
excellently acted, and a most excellent play for variety. I had sent my
wife to meet me there, who did come: so I did go to White Hall, and got
my Lord Bellassis to get me into the playhouse; and there, after all
staying above an hour for the players, the King and all waiting, which
was absurd, saw “Henry the Fifth” well done by the Duke’s people, and
in most excellent habit, all new vests, being put on but this night.
But I sat so high and far off, that I missed most of the words, and sat
with a wind coming into my back and neck, which did much trouble me.
The play continued till twelve at night; and then up, and a most horrid
cold night it was, and frosty, and moonshine.

1666-67. January 7th. To the Duke’s House, and saw “Macbeth,” which,
though I saw it lately, yet appears a most excellent play in all
respects, but especially in divertisement, though it be a deep tragedy;
which is a strange perfection in a tragedy, it being most proper here,
and suitable.

1667. October 16th. To the Duke of York’s House; and I was vexed to
see Young, who is but a bad actor at best, act Macbeth, in the room
of Betterton, who, poor man! is sick: but, Lord! what a prejudice it
wrought in me against the whole play, and everybody else agreed in
disliking this fellow. Thence home, and there find my wife gone home;
because of this fellow’s acting of the part, she went out of the house
again.

                _Diary and Correspondence of Samuel Pepys, with a
                    Life and Notes_, by Richard, Lord Braybrooke.
                    1888.


MARGARET CAVENDISH, DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE, 1664

(1624?-1674)

I wonder how that person you mention in your letter could either have
the conscience, or confidence to dispraise Shakespeare’s plays, as
to say they were made up only with clowns, fools, watchmen, and the
like; but to answer that person, though Shakespeare’s wit will answer
for himself, I say, that it seems by his judging, or censuring, he
understands not plays, or wit; for to express properly, rightly,
usually, and naturally, a clown’s, or fool’s humour, expressions,
phrases, garbs, manners, actions, words, and course of life, is as
witty, wise, judicious, ingenious, and observing, as to write and
express the expressions, phrases, garbs, manners, actions, words, and
course of life, of kings and princes; and to express naturally, to
the life, a mean country wench, as a great lady; a courtesan, as a
chaste woman; a mad man, as a man in his right reason and senses; a
drunkard, as a sober man; a knave, as an honest man; and so a clown,
as a well-bred man; and a fool, as a wise man; nay, it expresses
and declares a greater wit, to express, and deliver to posterity,
the extravagances of madness, the subtlety of knaves, the ignorance
of clowns, and the simplicity of naturals, or the craft of feigned
fools, than to express regularities, plain honesty, courtly garbs,
or sensible discourses, for ’tis harder to express nonsense than
sense, and ordinary conversations, than that which is unusual; and
’tis harder, and requires more wit to express a jester, than a grave
statesman; yet Shakespeare did not want wit to express to the life all
sorts of persons, of what quality, profession, degree, breeding, or
birth soever; nor did he want wit to express the divers and different
humours, or natures or several passions in mankind; and so well he hath
expressed in his plays all sorts of persons, as one would think he had
been transformed into every one of those persons he hath described....
Who could not swear he had been a noble lover, that could woo so
well? and there is not any person he had described in his book, but
his readers might think they were well acquainted with them; indeed,
Shakespeare had a clear judgment, a quick wit, a spreading fancy, a
subtle observation, a deep apprehension, and a most eloquent elocution;
truly he was a natural orator, as well as a natural poet, and he was
not an orator to speak well only on some subjects, as lawyers, who can
make eloquent orations at the bar, and plead subtly and wittily in
law-cases, or divines, that can preach eloquent sermons, or dispute
subtly and wittily in theology, but take them from that, and put them
to other subjects, and they will be to seek; but Shakespeare’s wit and
eloquence was general, for and upon all subjects, he rather wanted
subjects for his wit and eloquence to work on, for which he was forced
to take some of his plots out of history, where he only took the bare
designs, the wit and language being all his own.

           _CCXI Sociable Letters written by the Lady Marchioness
               of Newcastle._ 1664. Letter CXXIII.


JOHN DRYDEN, 1667

(1631-1700)

    As when a tree’s cut down, the secret root
    Lives under ground, and thence new branches shoot;
    So, from old Shakespeare’s honour’d dust, this day
    Springs up and buds a new reviving play.
    Shakespeare who, taught by none, did first impart
    To Fletcher wit, to labouring Jonson art.
    He, monarch-like, gave those his subjects law,
    And is that Nature which they paint and draw.
    Fletcher reach’d that which on his heights did grow,
    Whilst Jonson crept and gather’d all below.
    This did his love, and this his mirth digest:
    One imitates him most, the other best.
    If they have since out-writ all other men,
    ’Tis with the drops which fell from Shakespeare’s pen.
    The storm which vanish’d on the neighb’ring shore,
    Was taught by Shakespeare’s _Tempest_ first to roar.
    That innocence and beauty which did smile
    In Fletcher, grew on this Enchanted Isle.
    But Shakespeare’s magick could not copy’d be,
    Within that circle none durst walk but he.
    I must confess ’twas bold, nor would you now
    That liberty to vulgar wits allow,
    Which works by magick supernatural things:
    But Shakespeare’s pow’r is sacred as a king’s.
    Those legends from old priesthood were receiv’d,
    And he then writ, as people then believed.

                _Prologue to the Tempest or the Enchanted Island,
                    by Sir William D’Avenant and John Dryden._
                    1676.

    See also Dryden’s _Prologue to Troilus and Cressida_, spoken by
    Mr. Betterton representing the Ghost of Shakespeare.


1668

To begin, then, with Shakespeare; he was the man who of all modern, and
perhaps ancient poets, had the largest and most comprehensive soul. All
the images of nature were still present to him, and he drew them not
laboriously, but luckily: when he describes any thing, you more than
see it, you feel it too. Those who accuse him to have wanted learning,
give him the greater commendation: he was naturally learned; he needed
not the spectacles of books to read Nature; he looked inwards, and
found her there. I cannot say he is everywhere alike; were he so, I
should do him injury to compare him with the greatest of mankind. He is
many times flat, insipid; his comic wit degenerating into clenches, his
serious swelling into bombast. But he is always great, when some great
occasion is presented to him; no man can say he ever had a fit subject
for his wit, and did not then raise himself as high above the rest of
poets,

    _Quantum lenta solent inter viberna cupressi._

                     _Of Dramatic Poesie, an Essay_, 1668, p. 47.

    The following is from Dryden’s _Defence of the Epilogue_:—Let
    any man who understands English read diligently the works of
    Shakespeare and Fletcher, and I dare undertake that he will
    find in every page either some solecism of speech, or some
    notorious flaw in sense; and yet these men are reverenced, when
    we are not forgiven. That their wit is great, and many times
    their expressions noble, envy itself cannot deny.

          ——_Neque ego illis detrahere ausim
        Hærentem capiti multa cum laude coronam._

    But the times were ignorant in which they lived. Poetry was
    then, if not in its infancy among us, at least not arrived to
    its vigour and maturity. Witness the lameness of their plots;
    many of which, especially those which they writ first (for even
    that age refined itself in some measure), were made up of some
    ridiculous incoherent story, which in one play many times took
    up the business of an age. I suppose I need not name “Pericles,
    Prince of Tyre,” nor the historical plays of Shakespeare;
    besides many of the rest, as the “Winter’s Tale,” “Love’s
    Labour’s Lost,” “Measure for Measure,” which were either
    grounded on impossibilities, or at least so meanly written that
    the comedy neither caused your mirth, nor the serious part your
    concernment.


ANONYMOUS, 1672

    In country beauties, as we often see
    Something that takes in their simplicity;
    Yet while they charm, they know not they are fair,
    And take without their spreading of the snare;
    Such artless beauty lies in Shakespeare’s wit,
    ’Twas well in spite of him what ere he writ.
    His excellencies came and were not sought,
    His words like casual atoms made a thought:
    Drew up themselves in rank and file, and writ,
    He wond’ring how the Devil it were such wit.
    Thus like the drunken tinker, in his play,
    He grew a prince, and never knew which way.
    He did not know what trope or figure meant,
    But to persuade is to be eloquent;
    So in this Cæsar which this day you see,
    Tully ne’er spoke as he makes Anthony.
    Those then that tax his learning are to blame,
    He knew the thing, but did not know the name:
    Great Jonson did that ignorance adore,
    And though he envied much, admir’d him more.
    The faultless Jonson equally writ well:
    Shakespeare made faults; but then did more excell.
    One close at guard like some old fencer lay,
    T’other more open, but he show’d more play.
    In imitation Jonson’s wit was shown,
    Heaven made his men but Shakespeare made his own.
    Wise Jonson’s talent in observing lay,
    But other’s follies still made up his play.
    He drew the like in each elaborate line,
    But Shakespeare, like a master, did design.
    Jonson with skill dissected human kind,
    And show’d their faults that they their faults might find.
    But then, as all anatomists must do,
    He to the meanest of mankind did go,
    And took from gibbets such as he would show.
    Both are so great that he must boldly dare,
    Who both of ’em does judge and both compare.
    If amongst poets, one more bold there be,
    The man that dare attempt in either way, is he.

              _Covent Garden Drollery, or a Collection of all the
                  Choice Songs, Poems, Prologues, and Epilogues
                  (Sung and Spoken at Courts and Theaters),
                  never in Print before._ Written by the
                  refined’st Witts of the Age, and collected by
                  A. B. [? Alex. Brome]. 1672.


EDWARD PHILLIPS, 1675

(1630-1696?)

William Shakespeare, the glory of the English Stage; whose nativity
at Stratford-upon-Avon is the highest honour that town can boast of:
from an actor of tragedies and comedies, he became a maker; and such
a maker, that though some others may perhaps pretend to a more exact
decorum and economy, especially in tragedy, never any expressed a more
lofty and tragic height, never any represented nature more purely
to the life; and where the polishments of art are most wanting, as
probably his learning was not extraordinary, he pleaseth with a certain
wild and native elegance; and in all his writings hath an unvulgar
style, as well in his _Venus and Adonis_, his _Rape of Lucrece_, and
other various poems, as in his dramatics.

                  _Theatrum Poetarum._ 1675. Preface. _The Modern
                      Poets_, p. 194.


THOMAS OTWAY, 1680

(1652-1685)

    In ages past (when will those times renew?),
    When empires flourish’d, so did poets too.
    When great Augustus the world’s empire held,
    Horace and Ovid’s happy verse excell’d.
    Ovid’s soft genius, and his tender arts
    Of moving Nature, melted hardest hearts.
    It did th’ imperial beauty, Julia, move
    To listen to the language of his love.
    Her father honour’d him: and on her breast
    With ravish’d sense in her embraces prest,
    He lay transported, fancy-full and blest.
    Horace’s lofty genius boldlier rear’d
    His manly head, and through all Nature steer’d;
    Her richest pleasures in his verse refin’d,
    And wrought ’em to the relish of the mind.
    He lash’d with a true poet’s fearless rage,
    The villanies and follies of the age;
    Therefore Mecænas, that great fav’rite rais’d
    Him high, and by him was he highly prais’d.
    Our Shakespeare wrote, too, in an age as blest,
    The happiest poet of his time, and best;
    A gracious Prince’s favour cheer’d his muse,
    A constant favour he ne’er fear’d to lose.
    Therefore he wrote with fancy unconfin’d,
    And thoughts that were immortal as his mind;
    And from the crop of his luxuriant pen
    E’er since succeeding poets humbly glean.

               _Prologue to the History and Fall of Caius Marius.
                   A Tragedy._ 1712.


“A PERSON OF HONOUR,” 1681

I can’t, without infinite ingratitude to the memory of those excellent
persons, omit the first famous masters in’t, of our nation, venerable
Shakespeare and the great Ben Jonson. I have had a particular kindness
always for most of Shakespeare’s tragedies, and for many of his
comedies, and I can’t but say that I can never enough admire his style
(considering the time he writ in, and the great alteration that has
been in the refining of our language since), for he has expressed
himself so very well in’t that ’tis generally approved of still; and
for maintaining of the characters of the persons design’d, I think none
ever exceeded him.

           “_An Essay on Dramatic Poetry_” appended to _Amaryllis
               to Tityrus, Being the First Heroick Harangue of
               the excellent pen of Monsieur Scudery. A Witty and
               Pleasant Novel._ Englished by a Person of Honour,
               1681, pp. 66-67.


SIR CHARLES SEDLEY, 1693

(1639?-1701)

    But against old as well as new to rage,
    Is the peculiar frenzy of this age.
    Shakespeare must down, and you must praise no more
    Soft Desdemona, nor the jealous Moor:
    Shakespeare whose fruitful genius, happy wit
    Was fram’d and finish’d at a lucky hit;
    The pride of Nature, and the shame of schools,
    Born to create, and not to learn from rules;
    Must please no more, his bastards now deride,
    Their father’s nakedness they ought to hide,
    But when on spurs their Pegasus they force,
    Their jaded Muse is distanc’d in the course.

                _The Wary Widdow, or Sir Noisy Parrat. A Comedy._
                    By Henry Higden. Prologue by Sir Charles
                    Sydley. 1693.




THE SECOND PERIOD

THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY


SIR RICHARD STEELE, 1709

(1672-1729)

The play of “The London Cuckolds” was acted this evening before a
suitable audience, who were extremely well diverted with that heap of
vice and absurdity. The indignation which Eugenio, who is a gentleman
of just taste, has, upon occasion of seeing human nature fall so low
in their delights, made him, I thought, expatiate upon the mention
of this play very agreeably. “Of all men living,” said he, “I pity
players (who must be men of good understanding to be capable of being
such) that they are obliged to repeat and assume proper gestures for
representing things, of which their reason must be ashamed, and which
they must disdain their audience for approving. The amendment of
these low gratifications is only to be made by people of condition,
by encouraging the presentation of the noble characters drawn by
Shakespeare and others, from whence it is impossible to return without
strong impressions of honour and humanity. On these occasions distress
is laid before us with all its causes and consequences, and our
resentment placed according to the merit of the persons afflicted. Were
dramas of this nature more acceptable to the taste of the town, men who
have genius would bend their studies to excel in them.”

                              _The Tatler_, No. 8, 28 April 1709.

    _The London Cuckolds_, by Edward Ravenscroft, first produced
    1682.


NICHOLAS ROWE, 1709

(1674-1718)

The delicacy of his taste, and the natural bent of his own genius
(equal, if not superior, to some of the best of theirs [the ancients]),
would certainly have led him to read and study them with so much
pleasure, that some of their fine images would naturally have
insinuated themselves into, and been mixed with his own writings; so
that his not copying at least something from them, may be an argument
of his never having read them. Whether his ignorance of the ancients
were a disadvantage to him or no, may admit of a dispute: for though
the knowledge of them might have made him more correct, yet it is not
improbable but that the regularity and deference for them, which would
have attended that correctness, might have restrained some of that
fire, impetuosity, and even beautiful extravagance, which we admire in
Shakespeare: and I believe we were better pleased with those thoughts,
altogether new and uncommon, which his own imagination supplied him so
abundantly with, than if he had given us the most beautiful passages
out of the Greek and Latin poets, and that in the most agreeable manner
that it was possible for a master of the English language to deliver
them.

                  _Some Account of the Life, etc., of Mr. William
                      Shakespear_, p. iii. prefixed to _Works of
                      Shakespeare_, ed. N. Rowe. 1709.

    Of this passage and the question of Shakespeare’s knowledge
    of the ancients, Theobald, who favoured the view that his
    acquaintance with classical writings was not inconsiderable,
    remarks in his preface, “The result of the controversy must
    certainly, either way, terminate to our author’s honour: how
    happily he could imitate them, if that point be allowed; or how
    gloriously he could think like them, without owing anything to
    imitation.”


ELIJAH FENTON, 1711

(1683-1730)

    Shakespeare, the genius of our isle, whose mind
    (The universal mirror of mankind)
    Express’d all images, enrich’d the stage,
    But sometimes stoop’d to please a barbarous age.
    When his immortal bays began to grow,
    Rude was the language, and the humour low:
    He, like the God of Day, was always bright,
    But rolling in its course, his orb of light
    Was sullied, and obscur’d, though soaring high,
    With spots contracted from the nether sky.
    But whither is th’ adventurous Muse betray’d?
    Forgive her rashness, venerable shade!
    May Spring with purple flowers perfume thy urn;
    And Avon with his greens thy grave adorn:
    Be all thy faults, whatever faults there be,
    Imputed to the times, and not to thee.
      Some scions shot from this immortal root,
    Their tops much lower, and less fair the fruit,
    Jonson the tribute of my verse might claim,
    Had he not strove to blemish Shakespeare’s name.
    But, like the radiant twins that gild the sphere,
    Fletcher and Beaumont next in pomp appear:
    The first a fruitful vine, in blooming pride,
    Had been by superfluity destroy’d,
    But that his friend, judiciously severe,
    Prun’d the luxuriant boughs with artful care;
    On various sounding harps the Muses play’d,
    And sung, and quaff’d their nectar in the shade.
      Few moderns in the lists with these may stand,
    For in those days were giants in the land:
    Suffice it now by lineal right to claim,
    And bow with filial awe to Shakespeare’s fame;
    The second honours are a glorious name.
    Achilles dead, they found no equal lord
    To wear his armour, and to wield his sword.

                        _An Epistle to Mr. Southerne, from Kent._
                            January 28, 1710-11.


JOHN DENNIS, 1712

(1657-1734)

Shakespeare was one of the greatest geniuses that the world e’er saw
for the Tragic Stage. Though he lay under greater disadvantages than
any of his successors, yet had he greater and more genuine beauties
than the best and greatest of them. And what makes the brightest glory
of his character, those beauties were entirely his own, and owing to
the force of his own nature; whereas his faults were owing to his
education, and to the age that he lived in. One may say of him as they
did of Homer, that he had none to imitate, and is himself inimitable.

              _An Essay on the Genius and Writings of Shakespear:
                  with some Letters of Criticism to the
                  SPECTATOR._ 1712, pp. 1, 2.


EDWARD YOUNG, 1712

(1683-1765)

    To claim attention, and the heart invade,
    Shakespeare but _wrote_ the play th’ Almighty _made_.
    Our neighbour’s stage art too bare-fac’d betrays,
    ’Tis great Corneille at every scene we praise;
    On nature’s surer aid Britannia calls,
    None think of Shakespeare till the curtain falls;
    Then with a sigh returns our audience home,
    From Venice, Egypt, Persia, Greece, or Rome.

      .       .       .       .       .       .

    And yet in Shakespeare something still I find,
    That makes me less esteem all humankind;
    He made one nature and another found,
    Both in his page with master-strokes abound;
    His witches, fairies, and enchanted isle,
    Bid us no longer at our nurses smile;
    Of lost historians we almost complain,
    Nor think it the creation of his brain.

                    _Epistle to the Right Honourable George, Lord
                        Lansdowne._ 1712, ll. 295-302 and 313-20.


JOSEPH ADDISON, 1714

(1672-1719)

Our critics do not seem sensible that there is more beauty in the works
of a great genius who is ignorant of the rules of art, than in those
of a little genius who knows and observes them. It is of these men
of genius that Terence speaks in opposition to the little artificial
cavillers of his time:

    _Quorum æmulari exoptat negligentiam
    Potius quam istorum obscuram diligentiam._

A critic may have the same consolation in the ill success of his play,
as Dr. South tells us a physician has at the death of a patient,
that he was killed _secundum artem_. Our inimitable Shakespeare is a
stumbling-block to the whole tribe of these rigid critics. Who would
not rather read one of his plays, where there is not a single rule of
the stage observed, than any production of a modern critic, where there
is not one of them violated? Shakespeare was indeed born with all the
seeds of poetry, and may be compared to the stone in Pyrrhus’s ring,
which, as Pliny tells us, had the figure of Apollo and the nine Muses
in the veins of it, produced by the spontaneous hand of Nature, without
any help from art.

                          _The Spectator_, No. 592, 10 Feb. 1714.


ALEXANDER POPE, 1725

(1688-1744)

If ever any author deserved the name of an _Original_, it was
Shakespeare. Homer himself drew not his art so immediately from the
fountains of Nature; it proceeded through Egyptian strainers and
channels, and came to him not without some tincture of the learning, or
some cast of the models, of those before him. The poetry of Shakespeare
was inspiration indeed; he is not so much an imitator as an instrument
of Nature: and it is not so just to say that he speaks from her, as
that she speaks through him.

His _characters_ are so much Nature herself, that ’tis a sort of injury
to call them by so distant a name as copies of her. Those of other
poets have a constant resemblance, which shows that they received them
from one another, and were but multipliers of the same image; each
picture, like a mock rainbow, is but the reflection of a reflection.
But every single character in Shakespeare is as much an individual as
those in life itself; it is as impossible to find any two alike; as
such as from their relation or affinity in any respect appear most to
be twins, will upon comparison be found remarkably distinct. To this
life and variety of character we must add the wonderful preservation of
it, which is such throughout his Plays, that, had all the speeches been
printed without the very names of the persons, I believe one might have
applied them with certainty to every speaker.

The power over our passions was never possessed in a more eminent
degree, or displayed in so different instances. Yet all along there is
seen no labour, no pains to raise them; no preparation to guide our
guess to the effect, or be perceiv’d to lead toward it; but the heart
swells, and the tears burst out, just at the proper places. We are
surprised the moment we weep; and yet upon reflection find the passion
so just, that we should be surprised if we had not wept, and wept at
that very moment.

How astonishing is it, again, that the passions directly opposite to
these, laughter and spleen, are no less at his command! that he is not
more a master of the _great_ than of the _ridiculous_ in human nature;
of our noblest tendernesses, than of our vainest foibles; of our
strongest emotions, than of our idlest sensations!

Nor does he only excel in the passions: in the coolness of reflection
and reasoning he is full as admirable. His _sentiments_ are not only
in general the most pertinent and judicious upon every subject; but by
a talent very peculiar, something between penetration and felicity,
he hits upon that particular point on which the bent of each argument
turns, or the force of each motive depends. This is perfectly amazing,
from a man of no education or experience in those great and public
scenes of life which are usually the subject of his thoughts: so that
he seems to have known the world by intuition, to have looked through
human nature at one glance, and to be the only author that gives ground
for a very new opinion: That the philosopher, and even the man of the
world, may be _born_, as well as the poet.

It must be owned that with all these great excellencies, he has almost
as great defects; and that as he has certainly written better, so he
has perhaps written worse, than any other. But I think I can in some
measure account for these defects, from several causes and accidents;
without which it is hard to imagine that so large and so enlightened
a mind could ever have been susceptible of them. That all these
contingencies should unite to his disadvantage seems to me almost as
singularly unlucky, as that so many various (nay contrary) talents
should meet in one man, was happy and extraordinary.

  .       .       .       .       .       .       .

I will conclude by saying of Shakespeare, that with all his faults,
and with all the irregularity of his _drama_, one may look upon his
works in comparison of those that are more finished and regular, as
upon an ancient majestic piece of Gothic architecture compared with a
neat modern building; the latter is more elegant and glaring, but the
former is more strong and more solemn. It must be allowed, that in one
of these there are materials enough to make many of the other. It has
much the greater variety, and much the nobler apartments; though we are
often conducted to them by dark, odd, and uncouth passages. Nor does
the whole fail to strike us with greater reverence, though many of the
parts are childish, ill-placed, and unequal to its grandeur.

                     Preface to _The Works of Shakespeare_. 1725.

    De Quincey in his essay on Pope says of this preface: “For the
    edition we have little to plead; but for the editor it is but
    just to make three apologies. In the _first_ place he wrote a
    brilliant preface, which, although (like other works of the
    same class) too much occupied in displaying his own ability,
    and too often, for the sake of an effective antithesis, doing
    deep injustice to Shakespeare, yet undoubtedly, as a whole,
    extended his fame, by giving the sanction and countersign of
    a great wit to the national admiration. _Secondly_, as Dr.
    Johnson admits, Pope’s failure pointed out the right road to
    his successors. _Thirdly_, even in this failure it is but fair
    to say, that in a graduated scale of merit, as distributed
    amongst the long succession of editors through that century,
    Pope holds a rank proportionable to his age. For the year 1720,
    he is no otherwise below Theobald, Hanmer, Capell, Warburton,
    or even Johnson, than as they are successively below each
    other, and all of them as to accuracy below Steevens, as he
    again was below Malone and Reed.”


JAMES THOMSON, 1727

(1700-1748)

    Happy Britannia! where the Queen of Arts,
    Inspiring vigour, Liberty abroad
    Walks unconfined, even to thy farthest cots,
    And scatters plenty with unsparing hand

      .       .       .       .       .       .

    Thy sons of glory many! Alfred thine,
    In whom the splendour of heroic war,
    And more heroic peace, when govern’d well,
    Combine; whose hallow’d name _the Virtues Saint_,
    And his own Muses love; the best of kings!

      .       .       .       .       .       .

                            Fair thy renown
    In awful sages and in noble bards;
    Soon as the light of dawning Science spread
    Her orient ray, and waked the Muses’ song.

      .       .       .       .       .       .

                            For lofty sense,
    Creative fancy, and inspection keen
    Through the deep windings of the human heart,
    Is not wild Shakespeare thine and Nature’s boast?

                         _The Seasons: Summer._ 1727, ll. 1442-6,
                             1479-83, 1531-4, and 1563-6.


LEWIS THEOBALD, 1733

(1688-1744)

In how many points of light must we be obliged to gaze at this great
poet! In how many branches of excellence to consider and admire him!
Whether we view him on the side of art or nature, he ought equally to
engage our attention; whether we respect the force and greatness of his
genius, the extent of his knowledge and reading, the power and address
with which he throws out and applies either nature or learning, there
is ample scope both for our wonder and pleasure. If his diction and the
clothing of his thoughts attract us, how much more must we be charmed
with the richness and variety of his images and ideas! If his images
and ideas steal into our souls, and strike upon our fancy, how much are
they improved in price when we come to reflect with what propriety and
justness they are applied to character. If we look into his characters,
and how they are furnished and proportioned to the employment he cuts
out for them, how are we taken up with the mastery of his portraits!
What draughts of Nature! What variety of originals, and how differing
each from the other! How are they dressed from the stores of his own
luxurious imagination; without being the apes of mode, or borrowing
from any foreign wardrobe! each of them are the standard of fashion
for themselves: like gentlemen that are above the direction of their
tailors, and can adorn themselves without the aid of imitation.

              Preface to _The Works of Shakespeare, collated with
                  the Oldest Copies and corrected; with Notes,
                  Explanatory and Critical_. By Mr. Theobald.
                  1733, vol. i. pp. ii-iii.


JOSEPH WARTON, 1740

(1722-1800)

    What are the lays of artful Addison,
    Coldly correct, to Shakespeare’s warblings wild?
    Whom on the winding Avon’s willow’d banks
    Fair Fancy found, and bore the smiling babe
    To a close cavern (still the shepherds show
    The sacred place, whence with religious awe
    They hear, returning from the field at eve,
    Strange whisp’rings of sweet music through the air):
    Here, as with honey gather’d from the rock
    She fed the little prattler, and with songs
    Oft sooth’d his wond’ring ears with deep delight.
    On her soft lap he sat, and caught the sounds.

            _The Enthusiast: or the Lover of Nature_, ll. 168-79.


WILLIAM COLLINS, 1743

(1721-1759)

    Too nicely Jonson knew the critic’s part;
    Nature in him was almost lost in art.
    Of softer mould the gentle Fletcher came,
    The next in order, as the next in name:
    With pleas’d attention ’midst his scenes we find
    Each glowing thought that warms the female mind;
    Each melting sigh and every tender tear,
    The lover’s wishes, and the virgin’s fear.
    His every strain the smiles and graces own,
    But stronger Shakespeare felt for man alone:
    Drawn by his pen, our ruder passions stand
    Th’ unrival’d picture of his early hand.

             _Verses humbly address’d to Sir Thomas Hanmer on his
                 Edition of Shakespeare’s Works._ 1743, p. 7.

    Hanmer’s edition of Shakespeare appeared in 1744. See p. 93.


SIR THOMAS HANMER, 1744

(1677-1746)

If that rich vein of sense which runs through the works of this author
can be retrieved in every part and brought to appear in its true
light, and if it may be hoped without presumption that this is here
effected; they who love and admire him will receive a new pleasure,
and all probably will be more ready to join in doing him justice, who
does great honour to his country as a rare and perhaps singular genius:
one who hath attained an high degree of perfection in those two great
branches of poetry, tragedy and comedy, different as they are in their
natures from each other; and who may be said without partiality to have
equalled, if not excelled, in both kinds, the best writers of any age
or century who have thought it glory enough to distinguish themselves
in either.

           Preface to _The Works of Shakespear. Carefully Revised
               and Corrected by the former Editions, and Adorned
               with Sculptures designed and executed by the best
               hands._ Oxford, 1744, vol. i. pp. v-vi.


SAMUEL JOHNSON, 1747

(1709-1784)

    When Learning’s triumph o’er her barb’rous foes
    First rear’d the stage, immortal Shakespeare rose;
    Each change of many-coloured life he drew,
    Exhausted worlds, and then imagined new:
    Existence saw him spurn her bounded reign,
    And panting Time toil’d after him in vain:
    His powerful strokes presiding truth impress’d,
    And unresisted passion storm’d the breast.

                 Prologue spoken by Mr. Garrick at the opening of
                     the Theatre in Drury Lane, 1747.

    “Drinking tea one day at Garrick’s with Mr. Langton, he [Dr.
    Johnson] was questioned if he was not somewhat of a heretic as
    to Shakespeare; said Garrick, ‘I doubt he is a little of an
    infidel.’—‘Sir,’ said Johnson, ‘I will stand by the lines I
    have written on Shakespeare in my Prologue at the opening of
    your Theatre.’ Mr. Langton suggested, that in the line

        “‘And panting Time toil’d after him in vain,’

    Johnson might have had in his eye the passage in the _Tempest_,
    where Prospero says of Miranda:

        “‘. . . She will outstrip all praise,
          And make it halt behind her.’

    Johnson said nothing. Garrick then ventured to observe, ‘I do
    not think that the happiest line in the praise of Shakespeare.’
    Johnson exclaimed (smiling), ‘Prosaical rogues! next time I
    write, I’ll make both time and space pant.’”—Notes by Langton
    in Boswell’s _Life of Dr. Johnson_.


BISHOP WILLIAM WARBURTON, 1747.

(1698-1779)

Of all the literary exercitations of speculative men, whether designed
for the use or entertainment of the world, there are none of so much
importance, or what are more our immediate concern, than those which
let us into the knowledge of our nature. Others may exercise the reason
or amuse the imagination; but these only can improve the heart, and
form the human mind to wisdom. Now, in this science, our Shakespeare is
confessed to occupy the foremost place; whether we consider the amazing
sagacity with which he investigates every hidden spring and wheel of
human action; or his happy manner of communicating this knowledge,
in the just and living paintings which he has given us of all our
passions, appetites, and pursuits. These afford a lesson which can
never be too often repeated, or too constantly inculcated.

            Preface to _The Works of Shakespear. The genuine Text
                (collated with all the former Editions and then
                corrected and emended) is here settled. Being
                restored from the Blunders of the first Editors,
                and the Interpolations of the two last. With a
                Comment and Notes, Critical and Explanatory._
                By Mr. Pope and Mr. Warburton. 1747, vol. i. p.
                xxiv.


CHRISTOPHER SMART, 1751

(1722-1771)

    Methinks I see with fancy’s magic eye,
    The shade of Shakespeare, in yon azure sky.
    On yon high cloud behold the bard advance,
    Piercing all nature with a single glance:
    In various attitudes around him stand
    The passions, waiting for his dread command.
    First kneeling Love before his feet appears,
    And, musically sighing, melts in tears.
    Near him fell Jealousy with fury burns,
    And into storms the amorous breathings turns;
    Then Hope, with heavenward look, and Joy draw near,
    While palsied Terror trembles in the rear.

                    Prologue to _Othello_, as it was acted at the
                        Theatre Royal in Drury Lane on Thursday
                        the 7th of March 1751 by Persons of
                        Distinction for their Diversion. Ll.
                        21-32.


DAVID HUME, 1754.

(1711-1774)

If Shakespeare be considered as a MAN, born in a rude age, and
educated in the lowest manner, without any instruction, either from the
world or from books, he may be regarded as a prodigy. If represented
as a POET, capable of furnishing a proper entertainment to a
refined or intelligent audience, we must abate much of this eulogy.
In his compositions, we regret, that many irregularities, and even
absurdities, should so frequently disfigure the animated and passionate
scenes intermixed with them; and at the same time, we perhaps admire
the more those beauties, on account of their being surrounded with
such deformities. A striking peculiarity of sentiment, adapted to a
single character, he frequently hits, as it were, by inspiration; but a
reasonable propriety of thought he cannot for any time uphold. Nervous
and picturesque expressions as well as descriptions abound in him; but
it is in vain we look either for purity or simplicity of diction. His
total ignorance of all theatrical art and conduct, however material a
defect, yet, as it affects the spectator rather than the reader, we can
more easily excuse, than that want of taste which often prevails in his
productions, and which gives way only by intervals to the irradiations
of genius. A great and fertile genius he certainly possessed, and one
enriched equally with a tragic and comic vein; but he ought to be cited
as a proof, how dangerous it is to rely on these advantages alone for
attaining an excellence in the finer arts. And there may even remain a
suspicion, that we over-rate, if possible, the greatness of his genius;
in the same manner as bodies often appear more gigantic, on account
of their being disproportioned and misshapen. He died in 1616, aged
fifty-three years.

Jonson possessed all the learning which was wanting to Shakespeare,
and wanted all the genius of which the other was possessed. Both of
them were equally deficient in taste and elegance, in harmony and
correctness. A servile copyist of the ancients, Jonson translated into
bad English the beautiful passages of the Greek and Roman authors,
without accommodating to the manners of his age and country. His merit
has been totally eclipsed by that of Shakespeare, whose rude genius
prevailed over the rude art of his contemporary. The English theatre
has ever since taken a strong tincture of Shakespeare’s spirit and
character; and thence it has proceeded, that the nation has undergone
from all its neighbours the reproach of barbarism, from which its
valuable productions in some parts of learning would otherwise have
exempted it.

                    _Appendix to the Reign of James I. History of
                        England from the Invasion of Julius Cæsar
                        to the Revolution in 1688._ 1754.


HORACE WALPOLE, EARL OF ORFORD, 1756

(1717-1797)

John and I are just going to Garrick’s with a grove of cypresses in our
hands, like the Kentish men at the Conquest. He has built a temple to
his master Shakespeare, and I am going to adorn the outside, since his
modesty would not let me decorate it within, as I proposed, with these
mottoes:

    _Quod spiro et placeo, si placeo, tuum est._

    That I spirit have and nature,
    That sense breathes in ev’ry feature,
    That I please, if please I do,—
    Shakespeare,—all I owe to you.

                          Letter to George Montagu, 14 Oct. 1756.
                              _Letters_, ed. Peter Cunningham,
                              1857, vol. iii. p. 36.


JOHN ARMSTRONG, 1758

(1709-1779)

Shakespeare, who I will venture to say had the most musical ear of
all the English poets, is abundantly irregular in his versification:
but his wildest licences seldom hurt the ear; on the contrary, they
give his verse a spirit and variety, which prevent its ever cloying.
Our modern tragedy-writers, instead of using the advantages of their
own languages, seem in general to imitate the monotony of the French
versification: and the only licence they ever venture upon, is that
poor tame one the supernumerary syllable at the end of a line; which
they are apt to manage in such a manner as to give their verse a most
ungraceful halt. But it is not want of ear alone which makes our common
manufacturers of tragedy so insipidly solemn and so void of harmony: it
is want of feeling.

                       “Of the Versification of English Tragedy.”
                           _Works_, 1770, ii. 164-5.


Shakespeare, indeed, without one perfect plan, has perhaps excelled all
other dramatic poets as to detached scenes. But he was a wonder!—His
deep knowledge of human nature, his prodigious variety of fancy and
invention, and of characters drawn with the strongest, truest, and most
exquisite strokes, oblige you to forget his most violent irregularities.

                          Of the Dramatic Unities, _ib._, p. 242.


WILLIAM MASON, 1759

(1724-1797)

    How oft I cried, “Oh come, thou tragic queen!
      March from thy Greece with firm majestic tread!
    Such as when Athens saw thee fill her scene,
      When Sophocles thy choral graces led:
    Saw thy proud pall its purple length devolve;
      Saw thee uplift the glittering dagger high;
    Ponder with fixed brow thy deep resolve,
      Prepar’d to strike, to triumph, and to die.
    Bring then to Britain’s plain that choral throng;
      Display thy buskin’d pomp, thy golden lyre;
    Give her historic forms the soul of song,
      And mingle Attic art with Shakespeare’s fire.”
    “Ah, what, fond boy, dost thou presume to claim?”
      The Muse replied, “mistaken suppliant, know,
    To light in Shakespeare’s breast the dazzling flame
      Exhausted all Parnassus could bestow.
    True, art remains; and if from his bright page
      Thy mimic power one vivid beam can seize,
    Proceed; and in that best of tasks engage,
      Which tends at once to profit, and to please.”

                                              _Caractacus_, 1759.


THOMAS GRAY, 1759

(1716-1771)

    Far from the sun and summer-gale,
    In thy green lap [_i.e._ Albion’s] was Nature’s darling laid,
    What time, where lucid Avon strayed,
    To him the mighty mother did unveil
    Her awful face: The dauntless child
    Stretch’d forth his little arms, and smil’d.
    This pencil take (she said) whose colours clear
    Richly paint the vernal year:
    Thine too these golden keys, immortal boy!
    This can unlock the gates of Joy;
    Of Horror that, and thrilling Fears,
    Or ope the sacred source of sympathetic Tears.

                   _The Progress of Poesy. A Pindaric Ode_, 1759,
                       iii. 1.


DAVID MALLET, 1759

(1705?-1765)

    Pride of his own, and wonder of this age,
    Who first created, and yet rules, the Stage,
    Bold to design, all powerful to express,
    Shakespear each passion drew in every dress:
    Great above rule, and imitating none;
    Rich without borrowing, nature was his own.
    Yet is his sense debas’d by gross alloy:
    As gold in mines lies mix’d with dirt and clay.
    Now, eagle-wing’d, his heavenward flight he takes;
    The big stage thunders, and the soul awakes:
    Now, low on earth, a kindred reptile creeps;
    Sad Hamlet quibbles, and the hearer sleeps.

                                _Of Verbal Criticism_, ll. 47-58.
                                    _Works_, 1759, vol. i. p. 21.


EDWARD YOUNG, 1759

(1683-1765)

Who knows whether Shakespeare might not have thought less, if he had
read more? Who knows if he might not have laboured under the load of
Jonson’s learning, as Enceladus under Ætna? His mighty genius, indeed,
though the most mountainous oppression, would have breathed out some
of his inextinguishable fire; yet possibly he might not have risen up
into that giant, that much more than common man, at which we now gaze
with amazement and delight. Perhaps he was as learned as his dramatic
province required; for whatever other learning he wanted, he was master
of two books unknown to many of the profoundly read, though books which
the last conflagration alone can destroy: the book of Nature, and that
of Man.

                     _Conjectures on Original Composition._ 1759.


MARK AKENSIDE, _c._ 1760

(1721-1770)

“_An Inscription._”

    O youths and virgins: O declining eld:
    O pale misfortune’s slaves: O ye who dwell
    Unknown with humble quiet; ye who wait
    In courts, or fill the golden seat of kings:
    O sons of sport and pleasure: O thou wretch
    That weep’st for jealous love, or the sore wounds
    Of conscious guilt, or death’s rapacious hand
    Which left thee void of hope: O ye who roam
    In exile; ye who through th’ embattl’d field
    Seek bright renown; or who for nobler palms
    Contend, the leaders of a public cause;
    Approach: behold this marble. Know ye not
    The features? Hath not oft his faithful tongue
    Told you the fashion of your own estate,
    The secrets of your bosom? Here then round
    His monument with reverence while ye stand,
    Say to each other: “This was Shakespeare’s form;
    Who walk’d in every path of human life,
    Felt every passion; and to all mankind
    Doth now, will ever, that experience yield
    Which his own genius only could acquire.”

                           _Poetical Works._ 1805, ii. pp. 136-7.


ROBERT LLOYD, 1760

(1733-1764)

    When Shakespeare leads the mind a dance,
    From France to England, hence to France,
    Talk not to me of time and place;
    I own I’m happy in the chase.
    Whether the drama’s here or there,
    ’Tis nature, Shakespeare, everywhere.
    The poet’s fancy can create,
    Contract, enlarge, annihilate,
    Bring past and present close together,
    In spite of distance, seas, or weather;
    And shut up in a single action
    What cost whole years in its transaction.
    So, ladies at a play or rout,
    Can flirt the universe about,
    Whose geographical account
    Is drawn and pictured on the mount:
    Yet when they please, contract the plan,
    And shut the world up in a fan.

                        _Shakespeare: An Epistle to Mr. Garrick._
                            1760, ll. 37-54.

    See also Lloyd’s _Ode to Genius_, 1760, ll. 1-14.


EDWARD CAPELL, 1760

(1713-1781)

It is said of the ostrich, that she drops her egg at random, to be
disposed of as chance pleases; either brought up to maturity by
the sun’s kindly warmth, or else crushed by beasts and the feet of
passers-by: such, at least, is the account which naturalists have
given us of this extraordinary bird; and admitting it for a truth, she
is in this a fit emblem of almost every great genius: they conceive
and produce with ease those noble issues of human understanding; but
incubation, the dull work of putting them correctly upon paper and
afterwards publishing, is a task they cannot away with. If the original
state of all such authors’ writings, even from Homer downward, could
be inquired into and known, they would yield proof in abundance of the
justness of what is here asserted: but the author now before us shall
suffice for them all; being at once the greatest instance of genius
in producing noble things, and of negligence in providing for them
afterwards.

               Preface to _Mr. William Shakespeare, his Comedies,
                   Histories, and Tragedies set out by himself in
                   quarto or by the Players his Fellows in folio,
                   and now faithfully republished from those
                   Editions in ten volumes octavo; with an
                   Introduction, etc._ 1760, vol. i. pp. 1-2.

    Of this preface Dr. Johnson remarked: “If the man would have
    come to me, I would have endeavoured to endow his purpose with
    words, for as it is, he doth gabble monstrously.”—Boswell’s
    _Life of Dr. Johnson_, iii. 251, 2nd ed.


CHARLES CHURCHILL, 1761

(1731-1764)

    In the first seat, in robe of various dyes,
    A noble wildness flashing from his eyes,
    Sat Shakespeare.—In one hand a wand he bore,
    For mighty wonders fam’d in days of yore;
    The other held a globe, which to his will
    Obedient turn’d, and own’d the master’s skill:
    Things of the noblest kind his genius drew,
    And look’d through Nature at a single view:
    A loose he gave to his unbounded soul,
    And taught new lands to rise, new seas to roll;
    Call’d into being scenes unknown before,
    And, passing Nature’s bounds, was something more.

                                     _The Rosciad_, 1761, l. 259.


WILLIAM WHITEHEAD, 1762

(1715-1785)

    But chief avoid the boisterous roaring sparks,
    The sons of fire!—you’ll know them by their marks.
    Fond to be heard, they always court a crowd,
    And, though ’tis borrow’d nonsense, talk it loud.
    One epithet supplies their constant chime,
    Damn’d bad, damn’d good, damn’d low, or damn’d sublime.
    But most in quick short repartee they shine,
    Of local humour; or from plays purloin
    Each quaint stale scrap which every subject hits,
    Till fools almost imagine, they are wits.
    Hear them on Shakespeare! there they foam, they rage!
    Yet taste not half the beauties of his page,
    Nor see that art, as well as nature strove,
    To place him foremost in th’ Aonian grove.
    For there, there only, where the sisters join,
    His genius triumphs, and the work’s divine.
    Or would ye sift more near these sons of fire,
    ’Tis Garrick, and not Shakespeare, they admire,
    Without his breath, inspiring every thought,
    They ne’er perhaps had known what Shakespeare wrote;
    Without his eager, his becoming zeal,
    To teach them, though they scarce know why, to feel,
    A crude unmeaning mass had Jonson been,
    And a dead letter Shakespeare’s noblest scene.

                      _A Charge to the Poets._ 1762, ll. 167-190.


WILLIAM THOMPSON, 1763

(1712?-1766?)

“_In Shakespeare’s Walk._”

    By yon hills, with morning spread,
    Lifting up the tufted head,
    By those golden waves of corn,
    Which the laughing fields adorn,
    By the fragrant breath of flowers,
    Stealing from the woodbine bowers,
    By this thought-inspiring shade,
    By the gleamings of the glade,
    By the babblings of the brook,
    Winding slow in many a crook,
    By the rustling of the trees,
    By the humming of the bees,
    By the woodlark, by the thrush,
    Wildly warbling from the bush,
    By the fairy’s shadowy tread
    O’er the cowslip’s dewy head,
    Father, monarch of the stage,
    Glory of Eliza’s age,
    Shakespeare! deign to lend thy face,
    This romantic nook to grace,
    Where untaught nature sports alone,
    Since thou and nature are but one.

                  _Garden Inscriptions. Poetical Calendar, 1763._
                      First reprinted in Anderson’s _Poets of
                      Great Britain_, 1794, vol. x. p. 993.


SAMUEL JOHNSON, 1765

(1709-1784)

The work of a correct and regular writer is a garden accurately formed
and diligently planted, varied with shades, and scented with flowers;
the composition of Shakespeare is a forest, in which oaks extend their
branches, and pines tower in the air, interspersed sometimes with weeds
and brambles, and sometimes giving shelter to myrtles and to roses;
filling the eye with awful pomp, and gratifying the mind with endless
diversity. Other poets display cabinets of precious rarities, minutely
finished, wrought into shape, and polished into brightness. Shakespeare
opens a mine which contains gold and diamonds in unexhaustible plenty,
though clouded by incrustations, debased by impurities, and mingled
with a mass of meaner minerals.

                          Preface to Shakespeare’s _Works_. 1765.

    In _The Rambler_, No. 156 (14 Sept. 1751), Johnson wrote:
    “Instead of vindicating tragi-comedy by the success of
    Shakespeare, we ought perhaps to pay new honours to that
    transcendent and unbounded genius that could preside over the
    passions in sport; who, to actuate the affections, needed
    not the slow gradation of common means, but could fill the
    heart with instantaneous jollity or sorrow, and vary our
    disposition as he changed his scenes. Perhaps the effects even
    of Shakespeare’s poetry might have been greater, had he not
    counteracted himself; and we might have been more interested
    in the distresses of his heroes, had we not been so frequently
    diverted by the jokes of his buffoons.”


GEORGE KEATE, 1768

(1729-1797)

    Yes! jealous wits may still for empire strive,
    Still keep the flames of critick rage alive:
    Our Shakespeare yet shall all his rights maintain,
    And crown the triumphs of Eliza’s reign,
    Above control, above each classick rule,
    His tutress Nature, and the World his school.
    On daring pinions borne, to him was given
    Th’ aerial range of Fancy’s brightest Heaven,
    To bid rapt thought o’er noblest heights aspire,
    And wake each passion with a Muse of Fire.
    Revere his genius—to the dead be just,
    And spare the laurels, that o’ershade the dust.
    Low sleeps the bard, _in cold obstruction laid_,
    Nor asks the chaplet from a rival’s head.
    O’er the dear vault, Ambition’s utmost bound,
    Unheard shall Fame her airy trumpet sound!
    Unheard alike, nor grief nor transport raise,
    Thy blast of censure, or thy note of praise!
    As Raphael’s own creation grac’d his hearse,
    And sham’d the pomp of ostentatious verse,
    Shall Shakespeare’s honours by himself be paid,
    And Nature perish ere his pictures fade.

                _Ferney: An Epistle to Monsr. De Voltaire._ 1768.
                    _Poetical Works_, 1781, pp. 136-7.

    _Raphael’s Own Creation_:—The TRANSFIGURATION, that
    well-known picture of RAPHAEL, was carried before
    his body to the grave, doing more real honour to his memory
    than either his epitaph in the Pantheon, the famous distich
    of CARDINAL BEMBO, or all the other adulatory verses
    written on the same occasion.—KEATE.


DAVID GARRICK, 1769

(1717-1779)

“_Warwickshire._”

    Ye _Warwickshire_ lads, and ye lasses,
    See what at our Jubilee passes;
    Come revel away, rejoice and be glad;
    For the lad of all lads, was a _Warwickshire_ lad,
          _Warwickshire_ lad,
          All be glad;
    For the lad of all lads, was a _Warwickshire_ lad.

    Be proud of the charms of your county,
    Where Nature has lavish’d her bounty;
    Where much she has giv’n, and some to be spar’d;
    For the bard of all bards, was a _Warwickshire_ bard,
          _Warwickshire_ bard,
          Never pair’d;
    For the bard of all bards, was a _Warwickshire_ bard.

    Each shire has its different pleasures,
    Each shire has its different treasures;
    But to rare _Warwickshire_, all must submit;
    For the wit of all wits, was a _Warwickshire_ wit,
          _Warwickshire_ wit,
          How he writ!
    For the wit of all wits, was a _Warwickshire_ wit.

    Old Ben, Thomas Otway, John Dryden,
    And half a score more we take pride in;
    Of famous Will Congreve, we boast too the skill;
    But the Will of all Wills, was _Warwickshire_ Will,
          _Warwickshire_ Will,
          Matchless still;
    For the Will of all Wills, was a _Warwickshire_ Will.

    Our Shakespeare compar’d is to no man—
    Nor Frenchman, nor Grecian, nor Roman;
    Their swans are all geese, to the Avon’s sweet swan;
    And the man of all men, was a _Warwickshire_ man,
          _Warwickshire_ man,
          Avon’s swan;
    And the man of all men, was a _Warwickshire_ man.

    As ven’son is very inviting,
    To steal it our bard took delight in.
    To make his friends merry he never was lag;
    And the wag of all wags, was a _Warwickshire_ wag,
          _Warwickshire_ wag,
          Ever brag;
    For the wag of all wags, was a _Warwickshire_ wag.

    There never was seen such a creature,
    Of all she was worth, he robbed Nature;
    He took all her smiles, and he took all her grief;
    And the thief of all thieves, was a _Warwickshire_ thief.
          _Warwickshire_ thief,
          He’s the chief;
    For the thief of all thieves, was a _Warwickshire_ chief.

                  “Warwickshire: a Song.” _Shakespeare’s Garland.
                      Being a Collection of New Songs, Ballads,
                      Roundelays, Catches, Glees, Comic
                      Serenades, etc., performed at the Jubilee
                      at Stratford-upon-Avon._ 1769, p. 2.


ANONYMOUS, 1769

“_To the Immortal Memory of Shakespeare._”

    Immortal be his name,
    His memory, his fame!
    Nature and her works we see,
    Matchless Shakespeare, full in thee!
    Join’d by everlasting ties,
    Shakespeare but with Nature dies.
    Immortal be his Name,
    His memory, his fame!

                _Shakespeare’s Garland. Being a Collection of New
                    Songs, Ballads, etc., performed at the
                    Jubilee at Stratford-upon-Avon._ 1769, p. 15.


WILLIAM RICHARDSON, 1774

(1743-1814)

No writer has hitherto appeared who possesses in a more eminent degree
than Shakespeare, the power of imitating the passions. All of them seem
familiar to him; the boisterous no less than the gentle; the benign no
less than the malignant. There are several writers, as there are many
players, who are successful in imitating some particular passions,
but who appear stiff, awkward, and unnatural, in the expression of
others. Some are capable of exhibiting very striking representations
of resolute and intrepid natures, but cannot so easily bend themselves
to those that are softer and more complacent. Others, again, seem full
of amiable affection and tenderness, but cannot exalt themselves to
the boldness of the hero, or magnanimity of the patriot. The genius
of Shakespeare is unlimited. Possessing extreme sensibility, and
uncommonly susceptible, he is the Proteus of the drama; he changes
himself into every character, and enters easily into every condition of
human nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many dramatic writers of different ages are capable, occasionally, of
breaking out, with great fervour of genius, in the natural language
of strong emotion. No writer of antiquity is more distinguished for
abilities of this kind than Euripides. His whole heart and soul seem
torn and agitated by the force of the passion he imitates. He ceases
to be Euripides; he is Medea; he is Orestes. Shakespeare, however, is
most eminently distinguished, not only by these occasional sallies, but
by imitating the passion in all its aspects, by pursuing it through
all its windings and labyrinths, by moderating or accelerating its
impetuosity according to the influence of other principles and of
external events, and finally by combining it in a judicious manner with
other passions and propensities, or by setting it aptly in opposition.
He thus unites the two essential powers of dramatic invention, that of
forming characters; and that of imitating in their natural expressions,
the passions and affections of which they are composed.

            _A Philosophical Analysis and Illustration of some of
                Shakespeare’s remarkable Characters._ 1774.
                Introduction, pp. 39-42.


WILLIAM JULIUS MICKLE, 1775

(1735-1788)

    When Heaven decreed to soothe the feuds that tore
      The wolf-eyed barons, whose unletter’d rage
    Spurn’d the fair muse, Heaven bade on Avon’s shore
      A Shakespeare rise, and soothe the barbarous age:
      A Shakespeare rose; the barbarous heats assuage.
    At distance due how many bards attend!
      Enlarged and liberal from the narrow cage
    Of blinded zeal, new manners wide extend,
    And o’er the generous breast the dews of heaven descend.

                 Introduction to _The Lusiad, or the Discovery of
                     India. An Epic Poem._ Translated, 1775.


WILLIAM HAYLEY, 1777

(1745-1820)

    When mighty Shakespeare to thy judging eye
    Presents that magic glass whose ample round
    Reflects each figure in Creation’s bound,
    And pours, in floods of supernatural light,
    Fancy’s bright beings on the charmed sight,
    This chief enchanter of the willing breast
    Will teach thee all the magic he possessed.
    Placed in his circle, mark in colours true
    Each brilliant being that he calls to view:
    Wrapt in the gloomy storm, or robed in light,
    His weird sister or his fairy sprite.
    Boldly o’erleaping, in the great design,
    The bounds of nature, with a guide divine.

                 _A Poetic Epistle to an Eminent Painter_ [George
                     Romney]. 2nd edition, 1779. Part II. ll.
                     472-84.


THOMAS WARTON, 1777

(1728-1790)

    Avon, thy rural view, thy pastures wild,
    The willows that o’erhang thy twilight edge,
    Their boughs entangling with the embattled sedge;
    Thy brink with watery foliage quaintly fring’d,
    Thy surface with reflected verdure ting’d;
    Soothe me with many a pensive pleasure mild.
    But while I muse, that here the bard divine,
    Whose sacred dust yon high arch’d aisles enclose,
    Where the tall windows rise in stately rows
    Above the embowering shade,
    Here first, at Fancy’s fairy-circled shrine,
    Of daisies pied his infant offering made;
    Here playful yet, in stripling years unripe,
    Fram’d of thy reeds a shrill and artless pipe:
    Sudden thy beauties, Avon, all are fled,
    As at the waving of some magic wand;
    An holy trance my charmed spirit wings,
    And awful shapes of warriors and of kings
    People the busy mead,
    Like spectres swarming to the wizard’s hall;
    And slowly pace, and point with trembling hand
    The wounds ill-cover’d with the purple pall.
    Before me Pity seems to stand
    A weeping mourner, smote with anguish sore,
    To see Misfortune rend in frantic mood
    His robe, with regal woes embroider’d o’er.
    Pale Terror leads the visionary band,
    And sternly shakes his sceptre dropping blood.

                       “Monody written near Stratford-upon-Avon.”
                           _Miscellaneous Odes._ 1777.


ANNA SEWARD, BEFORE 1782

(1747-1809)

“_On Shakespeare’s Monument at Stratford-upon-Avon._”

    Great Homer’s birth sev’n rival cities claim,
    Too mighty such monopoly of Fame;
    Yet not to birth alone did Homer owe
    His wondrous worth; what Egypt could bestow,
    With all the schools of Greece and Asia join’d,
    Enlarg’d th’ immense expansion of his mind.
    Nor yet unrival’d the Mæonian strain,
    The British Eagle and the Mantuan Swan
    Tow’r equal heights. But happier Stratford, thou
    With incontested laurels deck thy brow:
    Thy bard was thine _unschool’d_, and from thee brought
    More than all Egypt, Greece, or Asia taught.
    Not Homer’s self such matchless honours won;
    The Greek has rivals, but thy Shakespeare none.

                Dodsley’s _Collection of Poems by Several Hands_.
                    1782, ii. p. 315.

    “The British Eagle,” _i.e._ Milton.


WILLIAM LISLE BOWLES, 1794

(1762-1850)

“_On Shakespeare._”

    O sovereign master, who with lovely state
      Dost rule as in some isle’s enchanted land,
    On whom soft airs and shadowy spirits wait,
      Whilst scenes of faerie bloom at thy command!
    On thy wild shores forgetful could I lie,
    And list, till earth dissolved, to thy sweet minstrelsy!

    Called by thy magic from the hoary deep,
      Aërial forms should in bright troops ascend,
    And then a wondrous masque before me sweep;
      While sounds _that the earth owned not_, seem to blend
    Their stealing melodies, that when the strain
    Ceased, _I should weep, and would so dream again_!

    The charm is wound: I see an aged form,
      In white robes, on the winding sea-shore stand;
      O’er the careering surge he waves his wand:
    Upon the black rock bursts the bidden storm.
    Now from bright opening clouds I hear a lay,
    _Come to these yellow sands, fair stranger, come away_.

      Saw ye pass by the weird sisters pale?
    Marked ye the lowering castle on the heath?
    Hark! hark! is the deed done? the deed of death!
      The deed is done—hail, king of Scotland, hail!
    I see no more;—to many a fearful sound
    The bloody cauldron sinks, and all is dark around.

    Pity! touch the trembling strings,
    A maid, a beauteous maniac, wildly sings:
    “They laid him in the ground so cold,
      Upon his breast the earth is thrown;
    High is heaped the grassy mould,
      _Oh! he is dead and gone_.
    The winds of the winter blow o’er his cold breast,
    But pleasant shall be his rest.”

    The song is ceased. Ah! who, pale shade, art thou,
      Sad raving to the rude tempestuous night?
    Sure thou hast had much wrong, so stern thy brow;
      So piteous thou dost tear thy tresses white;
    So wildly thou dost cry, “_Blow, bitter wind,
    Ye elements, I call not _you_ unkind_.”

    Beneath the shade of nodding branches grey,
      And rude romantic woods, and glens forlorn,
    The merry hunters wear the hours away;
      Rings the deep forest to the joyous horn!
    Joyous to all, but him who with sad look
    Hangs idly musing by the brawling brook.

    But mark the merry elves of fairy land!
      To the high moon’s gleamy glance,
      They with shadowy morris dance;
    Soft music dies along the desert sand;
      Soon at peep of cold-eyed day
      Soon the numerous lights decay;
        Merrily, now merrily,
        After the dewy moon they fly.

    Let rosy laughter now advance,
      And wit with sparkling eye,
      Where quaint powers lurking lie
    Bright fancy, the queen of the revels, shall dance,
      And point to the frolicsome train
      And antic forms that flit unnumbered o’er the plain.

    O sovereign master! at whose sole command
      We start with terror, or with pity weep;
    O! where is now thy all-creating wand?
      Buried ten thousand fathoms in the deep.
    The staff is broke, the powerful spell is fled,
    And never earthly guest shall in thy circle tread.

                        _Sonnets, with other Poems._ 3rd edition.
                            1794, pp. 67-70.

    This poem appears in later editions of Bowle’s sonnets in a
    different form. Stanza 9 is omitted, and the remaining stanzas
    are arranged thus: 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 3, 4, 5, 10:

    “Come to these yellow sands.” Ferdinand. See _The Tempest_.

    “The weird sisters.” See _Macbeth_.

    “A beauteous maniac.” Ophelia. See _Hamlet_.

    “Blow, bitter wind.” See _King Lear_.

    “Him, who with sad look.” Jacques. See _As You Like It_.

    “Elves of fairy land.” See _Midsummer Night’s Dream_.




THE THIRD PERIOD

NINETEENTH CENTURY


WILLIAM WORDSWORTH, 1802

(1770-1850)

    It is not to be thought of that the flood
      Of British freedom, which, to the open sea
      Of the world’s praise, from dark antiquity
    Hath flowed “with pomp of waters unwithstood,”
    Roused though it be full often to a mood
      Which spurns the check of salutary bands,
      That this most famous stream in bogs and sands
    Should perish; and to evil and to good
    Be lost for ever. In our halls is hung
      Armoury of the invincible knights of old:
    We must be free or die, who speak the tongue
      That Shakspeare spake; the faith and morals hold
    Which Milton held. In everything we are sprung
      Of Earth’s first blood, have titles manifold.

                   “Sonnets dedicated to Liberty.” _Poems._ 1807.


FELICIA DOROTHEA HEMANS, 1804

(1793-1835)

“_Shakespeare._”

    I love to rove o’er history’s page,
    Recall the hero and the sage;
    Revive the actions of the dead,
    And memory of ages fled:
    Yet it yields me greater pleasure
    To read the poet’s pleasing measure.
    Led by Shakespeare, bard inspired,
    The bosom’s energies are fired;
    We learn to shed the generous tear
    O’er poor Ophelia’s sacred bier;
    To love the merry moonlit scene,
    With fairy elves in valleys green;
    Or borne on fancy’s heavenly wings,
    To listen while sweet Ariel sings.
    How sweet the native wood notes wild
    Of him, the Muse’s favourite child!
    Of him whose magic lays impart
    Each various feeling to the heart.

                _Poems._ By Felicia Dorothea Browne, 1808, p. 48.

    One of Mrs. Hemans’ earliest tastes—relates her sister in her
    _Memoirs_—was a passion for Shakespeare, which she read as her
    choicest recreation at six years old. The above lines were
    written when she was eleven years of age.


SIR WALTER SCOTT, 1814

(1771-1832)

The English stage might be considered as equally without rule and
without model when Shakespeare arose. The effect of the genius of an
individual upon the taste of a nation is mighty; but that genius, in
its turn, is formed according to the opinions prevalent at the period
when it comes into existence. Such was the case with Shakespeare. With
an education more extensive, and a taste refined by the classical
models, it is probable that he also, in admiration of the ancient
drama, might have mistaken the form for the essence, and subscribed to
those rules which had produced such masterpieces of art. Fortunately
for the full exertion of a genius as comprehensive and versatile,
as intense and powerful, Shakespeare had no access to any models of
which the commanding merit might have controlled and limited his own
exertions. He followed the path which a nameless crowd of obscure
writers had trodden before him; but he moved in it with the grace and
majestic step of a being of a superior order, and vindicated for ever
the British theatre from a pedantic restriction to classical rule.
Nothing went before Shakespeare which in any respect was fit to fix
and stamp the character of a national drama; and certainly no one will
succeed him, capable of establishing by mere authority, a form more
restricted than that which Shakespeare used.

                   Article on “Drama,” _Encyclopædia Britannica_.
                       4th ed. 1814. 6th ed. vol. viii. p. 157.


SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE, 1817

(1772-1834)

No man was ever yet a great poet, without being at the same time a
profound philosopher. For poetry is the blossom and the fragrancy
of all human knowledge, human thoughts, human passions, emotions,
language. In Shakespeare’s POEMS, the creative power, and the
intellectual energy, wrestle as in a war embrace. Each in its excess
of strength seems to threaten the extinction of the other. At length
in the DRAMA they were reconciled, and fought each with its
shield before the breast of the other. Or, like two rapid streams, that
at their first meeting within narrow and rocky banks, mutually strive
to repel each other, and intermix reluctantly and in tumult; but soon
finding a wider channel and more yielding shores, blend, and dilate,
and flow on in one current and with one voice. The “Venus and Adonis”
did not, perhaps, allow the display of the deeper passions. But the
story of Lucretia seems to favour, and even demand their intensest
workings. And yet we find in _Shakespeare’s_ management of the tale,
neither pathos, nor any other _dramatic_ quality. There is the same
minute and faithful imagery as in the former poem, in the same vivid
colours, inspirited by the same impetuous vigour of thought, and
diverging and contracting with the same activity of the assimilative
and of the modifying faculties; and with a yet larger display, a
yet wider range of knowledge and reflection; and, lastly, with the
same perfect dominion, often _domination_, over the whole world of
language. What then shall we say? even this: that—

Shakespeare, no mere child of nature; no automaton of genius; no
passive vehicle of inspiration possessed by the spirit, not possessing
it; first studied patiently, meditated deeply, understood minutely,
till knowledge, become habitual and intuitive, wedded itself to his
habitual feelings, and at length gave birth to that stupendous power,
by which he stands alone, with no equal or second in his own class; to
that power, which seated him on one of the two glory-smitten summits
of the poetic mountain, with Milton as his compeer, not rival. While
the former darts himself forth, and passes into all the forms of human
character and passion, to one Proteus of the fire and the flood; the
other attracts all forms and things to himself, in the unity of his
own IDEAL. All things and modes of action shape themselves anew in the
being of MILTON; while SHAKESPEARE becomes all things, yet for ever
remaining himself. O what great men hast thou not produced, England! my
country!

                          _Biographia Literaria._ 1817, chap. xv.

    The following is from Coleridge’s _Literary Remains_, ed.
    Henry Nelson Coleridge, 1867, ii. pp. 68-69:—I greatly dislike
    beauties and selections in general; but as proof positive of
    his unrivalled excellence, I should like to try Shakespeare
    by this criterion. Make out your amplest catalogue of all the
    human faculties, as reason or the moral law, the will, the
    feeling of the coincidence of the two (a feeling _sui generis
    et demonstratio demonstrationum_) called the conscience,
    the understanding or prudence, wit, fancy, imagination,
    judgment,—and then of the objects on which these are to be
    employed, as the beauties, the terrors, and the seeming
    caprices of nature, the realities and the capabilities, that
    is, the actual and the ideal, of the human mind, conceived
    as an individual or as a social being, as in innocence or in
    guilt, in a play-paradise, or in a war-field of temptation;
    and then compare with Shakespeare under each of these heads
    all or any of the writers in prose and verse that have ever
    lived! Who, that is competent to judge, doubts the result? And
    ask your own hearts,—ask your own common-sense—to conceive the
    possibility of this man being—I say not, the drunken savage
    of that wretched sciolist, whom Frenchmen, to their shame,
    have honoured before their elder and better worthies,—but
    the anomalous, the wild, the irregular, genius of our daily
    criticism! What! are we to have miracles in sport? Or, I speak
    reverently, does God choose idiots by whom to convey divine
    truths to man?

    For a passage on Shakespeare as a “philosophical aristocrat”
    who “never promulgates any party tenets,” see “Notes on the
    _Tempest_.”


FRANCIS LORD JEFFREY, 1817

(1773-1850)

More full of wisdom and ridicule and sagacity, than all the moralists
and satirists that ever existed—he [Shakespeare] is more wild, airy and
inventive, and more pathetic and fantastic, than all the poets of all
regions and ages of the world:—and has all those elements so happily
mixed up in him, and bears his high faculties so temperately, that
the most severe reader cannot complain of him for want of strength or
of reason—nor the most sensitive for defect of ornament or ingenuity.
Every thing in him is in unmeasured abundance, and unequalled
perfection—but everything so balanced and kept in subordination, as not
to jostle or disturb or take the place of another. The most exquisite
poetical conceptions, images, and descriptions are given with such
brevity, and introduced with such skill, as merely to adorn, without
loading the sense they accompany. Although his sails are purple and
perfumed, and his prow of beaten gold, they waft him on his voyage,
not less, but more rapidly and directly than if they had been composed
of baser materials. All his excellences, like those of Nature herself,
are thrown out together; and instead of interfering with, support and
recommend each other. His flowers are not tied up in garlands, nor his
fruits crushed into baskets—but spring living from the soil, in all the
dew and freshness of youth; while the graceful foliage in which they
lurk, and the ample branches, the rough and vigorous stem, and the
wide-spreading roots on which they depend, are present along with them,
and share, in their places, the equal care of their Creator.

                    _The Edinburgh Review_, August 1817. Art. IX.
                        “Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays, by
                        William Hazlitt.” Vol. xxviii. p. 474.


WILLIAM HAZLITT, 1818

(1778-1830)

The striking peculiarity of Shakespeare’s mind was its generic quality,
its power of communication with all other minds—so that it contained a
universe of thought and feeling within itself, and had no one peculiar
bias, or exclusive excellence more than another. He was just like any
other man, but that he was like all other men. He was the least of an
egotist that it was possible to be. He was nothing in himself; but
he was all that others were, or that they could become. He not only
had in himself the germs of every faculty and feeling, but he could
follow them by anticipation, intuitively, into all their conceivable
ramifications, through every change of fortune or conflict of passion,
or turn of thought. He had “a mind reflecting ages past,” and
present:—All the people that ever lived are there. There was no respect
of persons with him. His genius alone shone equally on the evil and on
the good, on the wise and the foolish, the monarch and the beggar: “All
corners of the earth, kings, queens, and states, maids, matrons, nay,
the secrets of the grave,” are hardly hid from his searching glance.
He was like the genius of humanity, changing places with all of us at
pleasure, and playing with our purposes as with his own. He turned the
globe round for his amusement, and surveyed the generations of men,
and the individuals as they passed, with their different concerns,
passions, follies, vices, virtues, actions, and motives—as well those
that they knew, as those which they did not know, or acknowledge to
themselves. The dreams of childhood, the ravings of despair, were the
toys of his fancy. Airy beings waited at his call, and came at his
bidding. Harmless fairies nodded to him, and did him curtesies: and the
night-hag bestrode the blast at the command of “his so potent art.”
The world of spirits lay open to him, like the world of real men and
women: and there is the same truth in his delineations of the one as
of the other; for if the preternatural characters he describes could
be supposed to exist, they would speak, and feel, and act, as he makes
them. He had only to think of any thing in order to become that thing,
with all the circumstances belonging to it. When he conceived of a
character, whether real or imaginary, he not only entered into all its
thoughts and feelings, but seemed instantly, and as if by touching a
secret spring, to be surrounded with all the same objects, “subject to
the same skyey influences,” the same local, outward, and unforeseen
accidents which would occur in reality.

                    “On Shakespeare and Milton,” _Lectures on The
                        English Poets_. 1818, pp. 91-3.

    For a comment on this passage by William Minto, see p. 189.

           *       *       *       *       *

    The following occurs in Hazlitt’s essay “On Dryden and Pope”
    (_ib._, pp. 137-38):—The poet of nature is one who, from
    the elements of beauty, of power, and of passion in his own
    breast, sympathises with whatever is beautiful, and grand, and
    impassioned in nature, in its simple majesty, in its immediate
    appeal to the senses, to the thoughts and hearts of all men; so
    that the poet of nature, by the truth, and depth, and harmony
    of his mind, may be said to hold communion with the very soul
    of nature; to be identified with and to foreknow and to record
    the feelings of all men at all times and places, as they are
    liable to the same impressions; and to exert the same power
    over the minds of his readers, that nature does. He sees things
    in their eternal beauty, for he sees them as they are; he feels
    them in their universal interest, for he feels them as they
    affect the first principles of his and our common nature. Such
    was Homer, such was Shakespeare, whose works will last as long
    as nature, because they are a copy of the indestructible forms
    and everlasting impulses of nature, welling out from the bosom
    as from a perennial spring, or stamped upon the senses by the
    hand of their maker. The power of the imagination in them, is
    the representative power of all nature. It has its centre in
    the human soul, and makes the circuit of the universe.

    See also _The Round Table_, 1817—“On Posthumous Fame—whether
    Shakespeare was influenced by a love of it.”


JOHN KEATS, _c._ 1818

(1795-1821)

The genius of Shakespeare was an innate universality—wherefore he
had the utmost achievement of human intellect prostrate beneath his
indolent and kingly gaze. He could do easily Man’s utmost. His plans
of tasks to come were not of this world—if what he purposed to do
hereafter would not in his own Idea “answer the aim,” how tremendous
must have been his Conception of Ultimates!

               _Note on Troilus and Cressida_, I. iii. Marginalia
                   from the Shakespeare Folio of 1808. (_Works_,
                   ed. H. Buxton Forman. 1901, iii. p. 254.)


_c._ 1818

“_Sonnet on sitting down to read KING LEAR once again._”

    O golden-tongued Romance, with serene lute!
      Fair-plumed Syren, Queen of far-away!
      Leave melodising on this wintry day,
    Shut up thine olden pages, and be mute:
    Adieu! for, once again, the fierce dispute
      Betwixt damnation and impassion’d clay
      Must I burn through; once more humbly assay
    The bitter-sweet of this Shakespearian fruit:
      Chief Poet! and ye clouds of Albion,
        Begetters of our deep eternal theme!
      When through the old oak Forest I am gone,
        Let me not wander in a barren dream,
    But, when I am consumed in the fire,
    Give me new Phœnix wings to fly at my desire.

             _Life, Letters, and Literary Remains of John Keats_,
                 edited by Richard Monckton Milnes. Vol. i. p.
                 96.


JOHN WILSON, 1819

(1785-1854)

Shakespeare is of no age. He speaks a language which thrills in our
blood in spite of the separation of two hundred years. His thoughts,
passions, feelings, strains of fancy, all are of this day, as they were
of his own—and his genius may be contemporary with the mind of every
generation for a thousand years to come. He, above all poets, looked
upon man, and lived for mankind. His genius, universal in intellect,
could find, in no more bounded circumference, its proper sphere. It
could not bear exclusion from any part of human existence. Whatever
in nature and life was given to man, was given in contemplation and
poetry to him also, and over the undimmed mirror of his mind passed
all the shadows of our mortal world. Look through his plays and tell
what form of existence, what quality of spirit, he is most skilful to
delineate. Which of all the manifold beings he has drawn, lives before
our thoughts, our eyes, in most unpictured reality? Is it Othello,
Shylock, Falstaff, Lear, the wife of Macbeth, Imogen, Hamlet, Ariel? In
none of the other great dramatists do we see anything like a perfected
art. In their works, everything, it is true, exists in some shape or
other, which can be required in a drama taking for its interest the
absolute interest of human life and nature; but, after all, may not
the very best of their works be looked on as sublime masses of chaotic
confusion, through which the elements of our moral being appear? It
was Shakespeare, the most unlearned of all our writers, who first
exhibited on the stage perfect models, perfect images of all human
characters, and all human events. We cannot conceive any skill that
could from his great characters remove any defect, or add to their
perfect composition. Except in him, we look in vain for the entire
fulness, the self-consistency, and self-completeness of perfect art.

                  “A few words on Shakespeare, May 1819.” _Essays
                      Critical and Imaginative._ 1866, vol. iii.
                      pp. 420-21.


CHARLES SPRAGUE, 1824

(1791-1875)

        Who now shall grace the glowing throne,
        Where, all unrivall’d, all alone,
    Bold Shakespeare sat, and look’d creation through,
    The minstrel monarch of the worlds he drew?

    That throne is cold—that lyre in death unstrung,
    On whose proud note delighted Wonder hung.
    Yet old Oblivion, as in wrath he sweeps,
    One spot shall spare—the grave where Shakespeare sleeps.
    Rulers and ruled in common gloom may lie,
    But Nature’s laureate bards shall never die.
    Art’s chisell’d boast and glory’s trophied shore
    Must live in numbers or can live no more.
    While sculptured Jove some nameless waste may claim,
    Still roars the Olympic car in Pindar’s fame:
    Troy’s doubtful walls, in ashes pass’d away,
    Yet frown on Greece in Homer’s deathless lay;
    Rome, slowly sinking in her crumbling fanes,
    Stands all immortal in her Maro’s strains;
    So, too, yon giant empress of the isles,
    On whose broad sway the sun for ever smiles,
    To Time’s unsparing rage one day must bend,
    And all her triumphs in her Shakespeare end!

        O thou! to whose creative power
        We dedicate the festal hour,
    While Grace and Goodness round the altar stand,
    Learning’s anointed train, and Beauty’s rose-lipp’d band—
    Realms yet unborn, in accents now unknown,
    Thy song shall learn, and bless it for their own.
    Deep in the west, as Independence roves,
    His banners planting round the land he loves,
    Where Nature sleeps in Eden’s infant grace,
    In Time’s full hour shall spring a glorious race:
    Thy name, thy verse, thy language shall they bear,
    And deck for thee the vaulted temple there.
        Our Roman-hearted fathers broke
        Thy parent empire’s galling yoke,
    But thou, harmonious monarch of the mind,
    Around their sons a gentler chain shall bind;
    Still o’er our land shall Albion’s sceptre wave,
    And what her mighty Lion lost, her mightier Swan shall save.

                   Prize Ode recited at the representation of the
                       Shakespeare Jubilee, Boston, February 13,
                       1824.


CHARLES LAMB, 1824

(1775-1834)

    In “sad civility” once Garrick sate
    To see a play, mangled in form and state;
    Plebeian Shakespeare must the words supply,—
    The actors all were fools—of Quality.
    The scenes—the dresses—were above rebuke;—
    Scarce a performer there below a Duke.
    He sate, and mused how in his Shakespeare’s mind
    The idea of old nobility enshrined
    Should thence a grace and a refinement have
    Which passed these living Nobles to conceive—
    Who with such apish, base gesticulation,
    Remnants of starts, and dregs of playhouse passion,
    So foul belied their great forefathers’ fashion!
    He saw—and true nobility confessed
    Less in the high-born blood, than lowly poet’s breast.

             “Epilogue to an amateur Performance of Richard II.,”
                 ll. 10-24. _Works of Charles and Mary Lamb._
                 Ed. E. V. Lucas, 1903-4. Vol. v. p. 128.


JULIUS CHARLES HARE, 1827

(1795-1855)

Shakespeare “glances from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven.”
All Nature ministers to him, as gladly as a mother to her child.
Whether he wishes her to tune her myriad-voiced organ to Romeo’s
love, or to Miranda’s innocence, or to Perdita’s simplicity, or
to Rosalind’s playfulness, or to the sports of the Fairies, or to
Timon’s misanthropy, or to Macbeth’s desolating ambition, or to Lear’s
heart-broken frenzy—he has only to ask, and she puts on every feeling
and every passion with which he desires to invest her.

       *       *       *       *       *

No poet comes near Shakespeare in the number of bosom lines,—of lines
that we may cherish in our bosoms, and that seem almost as if they
had grown there,—of lines that, like bosom friends, are ever at hand
to comfort, counsel, and gladden us, under all the vicissitudes of
life,—of lines that, according to Bacon’s expression, “come home to our
business and bosoms,” and open the door for us to look in, and see what
is nestling and brooding there.

                                        _Guesses at Truth._ 1827.


JAMES HOGG, 1831

(1770-1835)

“_To the Genius of Shakespeare._”

        Spirit all limitless,
        Where is thy dwelling-place?
    Spirit of him whose high name we revere,
        Come on thy seraph wings,
        Come from thy wanderings,
    And smile on thy votaries, who sigh for thee here!

        Come, O thou spark divine,
        Rise from thy hallowed shrine;
    Here in the windings of Forth thou shalt see
        Hearts true to nature’s call
        Spirits congenial,
    Proud of their country, yet bowing to thee.

        Here with rapt heart and tongue,
        While our fond minds were young,
    Oft thy bold numbers we poured in our mirth;
        Now in our hall for aye
        This shall be holiday,
    Bard of all Nature, to honour thy birth.

        Whether thou tremblest o’er
        Green grave of Elsinore,
    Stayest o’er the hill of Dunsinnan to hover,
        Bosworth, or Shrewsbury,
        Egypt or Philippi;
    Come from thy roamings the universe over.

        Whether thou journey’st far
        On by the morning star,
    Dream’st on the shadowy brows of the moon,
        Or linger’st in fairyland,
        ’Mid lovely elves to stand,
    Singing thy carols unearthly and boon;—

        Here thou art called upon,
        Come thou to Caledon!
    Come to the land of the ardent and free!
        The land of the love recess,
        Mountain and wilderness,
    This is the land, thou wild meteor, for thee!

        Oh, never since time had birth,
        Rose from the pregnant earth
    Gems such as late have in Scotia sprung;—
        Gems that in future day,
        When ages pass away,
    Like thee shall be honoured, like thee shall be sung!

        Then here, by the sounding sea,
        Forest, and greenwood tree,
    Here to solicit thee cease shall we never:
        Yes, thou effulgence bright,
        Here must thy flame relight,
    Or vanish from Nature for ever and ever!

                      _Songs._ By the Ettrick Shepherd. Now first
                          collected. 1831, p. 304.


CHARLES LAMB, 1833

(1775-1834)

I am jealous of the combination of the sister arts. Let them sparkle
apart. What injury (short of the theatres) did Boydell’s Shakespeare
Gallery do me with Shakespeare?—to have Opie’s Shakespeare, Northcote’s
Shakespeare, light-headed Fuseli’s Shakespeare, heavy-headed Romney’s
Shakespeare, wooden-headed West’s Shakespeare (though he did the
best in “Lear”), deaf-headed Reynolds’s Shakespeare, instead of my,
and everybody’s Shakespeare. To be tied down to an authentic face of
Juliet! To have Imogen’s portrait! To confine the illimitable!

                      Letter to Samuel Rogers, December 21, 1833.
                          _Works of Charles and Mary Lamb._ Ed.
                          E. V. Lucas, 1903-4. Vol. vii.


HARTLEY COLERIDGE, 1833

(1796-1849)

“_To Shakespeare._”

    The soul of man is larger than the sky,
        Deeper than ocean, or the abysmal dark
        Of the unfathom’d centre. Like that Ark,
    Which in its sacred hold uplifted high,
    O’er the drown’d hills, the human family,
        And stock reserved of every living kind,
        So in the compass of the single mind
    The seeds and pregnant forms in essence lie,
    That make all worlds. Great Poet, ’twas thy art
        To know thyself, and in thyself to be
        Whate’er love, hate, ambition, destiny,
    Or the firm, fatal purpose of the heart,
    Can make of Man. Yet thou wert still the same,
    Serene of thought, unhurt by thy own flame.

                             _Poems._ Sonnet XXVIII. 1833, p. 28.


THOMAS DE QUINCEY, 1838

(1785-1859)

In the great world of woman, as the interpreter of the shifting phases
and the lunar varieties of that mighty changeable planet, that lovely
satellite of man, Shakespeare stands not the first only, not the
original only, but is yet the sole authentic oracle of truth. Woman,
therefore, the beauty of the female mind, _this_ is one great field of
his power. The supernatural world, the world of apparitions, _that_
is another.... In all Christendom, who, let us ask, who, who but
Shakespeare has found the power for effectually working this mysterious
mode of being?

  .       .       .       .       .       .       .

A third fund of Shakespeare’s peculiar power lies in his teeming
fertility of fine thoughts and sentiments. From his works alone might
be gathered a golden bead-roll of thoughts, the deepest, subtilest,
most pathetic, and yet most catholic and universally intelligible; the
most characteristic, also, and appropriate to the particular person,
the situation, and the case, yet, at the same time, applicable to
the circumstances of every human being, under all the accidents of
life, and all vicissitudes of fortune. But this subject offers so
vast a field of observation, it being so eminently the prerogative of
Shakespeare to have thought more finely and more extensively than all
other poets combined, that we cannot wrong the dignity of such a theme
by doing more, in our narrow limits, than simply noticing it as one of
the emblazonries upon Shakespeare’s shield.

Fourthly, we shall indicate (and, as in the last case, _barely_
indicate, without attempting in so vast a field to offer any adequate
illustrations) one mode of Shakespeare’s dramatic excellence, which
hitherto has not attracted any special or separate notice. We allude
to the forms of life, and natural human passion, as apparent in the
structure of his dialogue. Among the many defects and infirmities
of the French and of the Italian drama, indeed, we may say of the
Greek, the dialogue proceeds always by independent speeches, replying
indeed to each other, but never modified in its several terminal forms
immediately preceding. Now, in Shakespeare, who first set an example
of that most important innovation, in all his impassioned dialogues,
each reply or rejoinder seems the mere rebound of the previous speech.
Every form of natural interruption, breaking through the restraints
of ceremony under the impulses of tempestuous passion; every form
of hasty interrogative, ardent reiteration when a question has been
evaded; every form of scornful repetition of the hostile words; every
impatient continuation of the hostile statement; in short, all modes
and formulæ by which anger, hurry, fretfulness, scorn, impatience,
or excitement under any movement whatever, can disturb or modify or
dislocate the formal bookish style of commencement,—these are as rife
in Shakespeare’s dialogue as in life itself; and how much vivacity,
how profound a verisimilitude, they add to the scenic effect as an
imitation of human passion and real life, we need not say. A volume
might be written, illustrating the vast varieties of Shakespeare’s art
and power in this one field of improvement; another volume might be
dedicated to the exposure of the lifeless and unnatural result from the
opposite practice in the foreign stages of France and Italy. And we may
truly say, that were Shakespeare distinguished from them by this single
feature of nature and propriety, he would on that account alone have
merited a great immortality.

                    _Encyclopædia Britannica._ 7th edition, 1838.
                        Article on Shakespeare.

    The following fine apostrophe to Shakespeare occurs at the
    end of De Quincey’s essay “On the knocking at the gate in
    _Macbeth_”:—O, mighty poet! Thy works are not as those of other
    men, simply and merely great works of art; but are also like
    the phenomena of nature, like the sun and the sea, the stars
    and the flowers,—like frost and snow, rain and dew, hailstorm
    and thunder, which are to be studied with entire submission of
    our own faculties, and in the perfect faith that in them there
    can be no too much or too little, nothing useless or inert,—but
    that, the further we press in our discoveries, the more we
    shall see proofs of design and self-supporting arrangement
    where the careless eye had seen nothing but accident.


JOHN STERLING, 1839

(1806-1844)

“_Shakespeare._”

    How little fades from earth when sink to rest
    The hours and cares that moved a great man’s breast!
    Though nought of all we saw the grave may spare,
    His life pervades the world’s impregnate air;
    Though Shakespeare’s dust beneath our footsteps lies,
    His spirit breathes amid his native skies;
    With meaning won from him for ever glows
    Each air that England feels, and star it knows;
    His whispered words from many a mother’s voice
    Can make her sleeping child in dreams rejoice,
    And gleams from spheres he first conjoined to earth
    Are blent with rays of each new morning’s birth.
    Amid the sights and tales of common things,
    Leaf, flower, and bird, and wars, and deaths of kings,
    Of shore, and sea, and nature’s daily round,
    Of life that tills, and tombs that load the ground,
    His visions mingle, swell, command, pace by,
    And haunt with living presence heart and eye;
    And tones from him by other bosoms caught
    Awaken flush and stir of mounting thought,
    And the long sigh, and deep impassioned thrill,
    Rouse custom’s trance, and spur the faltering will.
    Above the goodly land more his than ours
    He sits supreme enthroned in skyey towers,
    And sees the heroic brood of his creation
    Teach larger life to his ennobled nation.
    O! shaping brain! O! flashing fancy’s hues!
    O! boundless heart kept fresh by pity’s dews!
    O! wit humane and blythe! O! sense sublime
    For each dim oracle of mantled Time!
    Transcendent Form of Man! in whom we read
    Mankind’s whole tale of impulse, thought, and deed;
    Amid the expanse of years beholding thee,
    We know how vast our world of life may be;
    Wherein, perchance, with aims as pure as thine,
    Small tasks and strengths may be no less divine.

                                           _Poems._ 1839, p. 151.


HENRY HALLAM, 1839

(1777-1859)

Of William Shakespeare, whom, through the mouths of those whom he has
inspired to body forth the modifications of his immense mind, we seem
to know better than any human writer, it may be truly said that we
scarcely know anything. We see him, so far as we do see him, not in
himself, but in a reflex image from the objectivity in which he was
manifested: he is Falstaff, and Mercutio, and Malvolio, and Jaques, and
Portia, and Imogen, and Lear, and Othello; but to us he is scarcely
a determined person, a substantial reality of past time, the man
Shakespeare. The two greatest names in poetry are to us little more
than names. If we are not yet come to question his unity, as we do that
of “the blind old man of Scios’ rocky isle,” an improvement in critical
acuteness doubtless reserved for a distant posterity, we as little feel
the power of identifying the young man who came up from Stratford, was
afterwards an indifferent player in a London theatre, and retired to
his native place in middle life, with the author of Macbeth and Lear,
as we can give a distinct historic personality to Homer. All that
insatiable curiosity and unwearied diligence have hitherto detected
about Shakespeare serves rather to disappoint and perplex us than to
furnish the slightest illustration of his character.

                 _Introduction to the Literature of Europe in the
                     Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Seventeenth
                     Centuries._ 1839, ii. 382-3.


—— JOHNSTONE, 1840

Some men can only acquire knowledge by a careful process of painstaking
investigation, while the minds of others descend at once, and with a
swoop, as it were, upon the truth of which they are in search. Others,
again, can not only do this, but having grasped the truth, they soar
upward with it to the highest pinnacles of imaginative loftiness, or
beyond these even, to the empyrean of thought, where the minds of
ordinarily gifted men may not follow them. Of this last class was
Shakespeare, the most wonderful of mere men that we know to have ever
lived.

                _The Table Talker, or Brief Essays on Society and
                    Literature._ 1840, vol. i. p. 183.


THOMAS CARLYLE, 1840

(1795-1881)

“_The Hero as Poet._”

It is in what I called Portrait-painting, delineating of men and
things, especially of men, that Shakespeare is great. All the greatness
of the man comes out decisively here. It is unexampled, I think, that
calm creative perspicacity of Shakespeare. The thing he looks at
reveals not this or that face of it, but its inmost heart and generic
secret: it dissolves itself as in light before him, so that he discerns
the perfect structure of it. Creative, we said; poetic creation, what
is this too but _seeing_ the thing sufficiently? The _word_ that will
describe the thing, follows of itself from such clear intense sight of
the thing. And is not Shakespeare’s _morality_, his valour, candour,
tolerance, truthfulness; his whole victorious strength and greatness,
which can triumph over such obstructions, visible there too? Great
as the world! No _twisted_, poor convex-concave mirror, reflecting
all objects with its own convexities and concavities; a perfectly
_level_ mirror;—that is to say withal, if we will understand it, a man
justly related to all things and men, a good man. It is truly a lordly
spectacle how this great soul takes in all kinds of men and objects, a
Falstaff, an Othello, a Juliet, a Coriolanus; sets them all forth to us
in their round completeness; loving, just, the equal brother of all.
_Novum Organum_, and all the intellect you will find in Bacon, is of a
quite secondary order; earthly, material, poor in comparison with this.
Among modern men, one finds, in strictness, almost nothing of the same
rank. Goethe alone, since the days of Shakespeare, reminds me of it. Of
him too you say that he _saw_ the object; you may say what he himself
says of Shakespeare: “His characters are like watches with dial-plates
of transparent crystal; they show you the hour like others, and the
inward mechanism also is all visible.”

            _On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History._
                Ed. H. D. Traill. 1898, pp. 104-5.

    In Carlyle’s essay on “Corn Law Rhymes” (_Edinburgh Review_,
    July, 1832, p. 342) occurs the following:—Foolish Pedant,
    that sittest there compassionately descanting on the Learning
    of Shakespeare! Shakespeare had penetrated into innumerable
    things; far into Nature with her divine Splendours and infernal
    Terrors, her Ariel Melodies, and mystic mandragora Moans; far
    into man’s workings with Nature, into man’s Art and Artifice;
    Shakespeare knew (_Kenned_, which in those days still partially
    meant _Can-ned_) innumerable things; what men are, and what
    the world is, and how and what men aim at there, from the Dame
    Quickly of modern Eastcheap to the Cæsar of ancient Rome, over
    many countries, over many centuries: of all this he had the
    clearest understanding and constructive comprehension; all this
    was his Learning and Insight.


WILLIAM WORDSWORTH, 1841

(1770-1850)

“_Shakespeare and Goethe._”

He (Goethe) does not seem to me to be a great poet in either of the
classes of poets. At the head of the first class I would place Homer
and Shakespeare, whose universal minds are able to reach every variety
of thought and feeling without bringing their own individuality before
the reader. They infuse, they breathe life into every object they
approach, but you never find _themselves_. At the head of the second
class, those whom you can trace individually in all they write, I would
place Spenser and Milton. In all that Spenser writes you can trace
the gentle affectionate spirit of the man; in all that Milton writes
you find the exalted sustained being that he was. Now, in what Goethe
writes, who aims to be of the first class, the _universal_, you find
the man himself, the artificial man where he should not be found; so
that I consider him a very artificial writer, aiming to be universal,
and yet constantly exposing his individuality, which his character
was not of a kind to dignify. He had not sufficiently clear moral
perceptions to make him anything but an artificial writer.

                  _Memoirs of William Wordsworth_, by Christopher
                      Wordsworth. 1851, vol. ii. pp. 437-8.

    The value of this estimate of Goethe is somewhat discounted
    by a remark made at another time by Wordsworth: “I have tried
    to read Goethe. I never could succeed.... I am not intimately
    acquainted with them [his poems] generally.” _Memoirs_, ii. p.
    478.


THOMAS BABINGTON, LORD MACAULAY, 1843

(1800-1859)

Highest among those who have exhibited human nature by means of
dialogue stands Shakespeare. His variety is like the variety of
nature, endless diversity, scarcely any monstrosity. The characters
of which he has given us an impression, as vivid as that which we
receive from the characters of our own associates, are to be reckoned
by scores. Yet in all these scores hardly one character is to be found
which deviates widely from the common standard, and which we should
call very eccentric if we met it in real life. The silly notion that
every man has one ruling passion, and that this clue, once known,
unravels all the mysteries of his conduct, finds no countenance in
the plays of Shakespeare. There man appears as he is, made up of a
crowd of passions, which contend for the mastery over him, and govern
him in turn. What is Hamlet’s ruling passion? Or Othello’s? Or Harry
the Fifth’s? Or Wolsey’s? Or Lear’s? Or Shylock’s? Or Benedick’s? Or
Macbeth’s? Or that of Cassius? Or that of Falconbridge? But we might
go on for ever. Take a single example, Shylock. Is he so eager for
money as to be indifferent to revenge? Or so eager for revenge as to be
indifferent to money? Or so bent on both together as to be indifferent
to the honour of his nation and the law of Moses? All his propensities
are mingled with each other, so that, in trying to apportion to each
its proper part, we find the same difficulty which constantly meets us
in real life. A superficial critic may say, that hatred is Shylock’s
ruling passion. But how many passions have amalgamated to form that
hatred? It is partly the result of wounded pride: Antonio has called
him dog. It is partly the result of covetousness: Antonio has hindered
him of half a million; and, when Antonio is gone, there will be no
limit to the gains of usury. It is partly the result of national and
religious feeling: Antonio has spit on the Jewish gabardine; and the
oath of revenge has been sworn by the Jewish Sabbath. We might go
through all the characters which we have mentioned, and through fifty
more in the same way; for it is the constant manner of Shakespeare to
represent the human mind as lying, not under the absolute dominion
of one despotic propensity, but under a mixed government, in which a
hundred powers balance each other. Admirable as he is in all parts
of his art, we most admire him for this, that while he has left us a
greater number of striking portraits than all other dramatists put
together, he has scarcely left us a single caricature.

                 Essay on “Diary and Letters of Madame D’Arblay,”
                     _Edinburgh Review_, Jan. 1843. Art. IX. vol.
                     lxxvi. pp. 560-1.


RALPH WALDO EMERSON, 1844

(1803-1882)

Shakespeare is the only biographer of Shakespeare; and even he can
tell nothing except to the Shakespeare in us; that is, to our most
apprehensive and sympathetic hour. He cannot step from off his tripod,
and give us anecdotes of his inspirations. Read the antique documents
extricated, analysed, and compared, by the assiduous Dyce and Collier;
and now read one of those skiey sentences—aerolites,—which seem to
have fallen out of heaven, and which, not your experience, but the man
within the breast, has accepted as words of fate; and tell me if they
match, if the former account in any manner for the latter: or, which
gives the most historical insight into the man.

Hence, though our external history is so meagre, yet, with Shakespeare
for biographer, instead of Aubrey and Rowe, we have really the
information which is material, that which describes character and
fortune, that which, if we were about to meet the man and deal with
him, would most import us to know. We have his recorded convictions
on those questions which knock for answer at every heart,—on life and
death, on love, on wealth and poverty, on the prizes of life, and
the ways whereby we come at them; on the characters of men, and the
influences, occult and open, which affect their fortunes; and on those
mysterious and demoniacal powers which defy our science, and which yet
interweave their malice and their gift in our brightest hours. Whoever
read the volume of the Sonnets, without finding that the poet had
there revealed, under masks that are no masks to the intelligent, the
lore of friendship and of love; the confusion of sentiments in the most
susceptible, and, at the same time, the most intellectual of men? What
trait of his private mind has he hidden in his dramas? One can discern,
in his ample pictures of the gentleman and the king, that forms and
humanities pleased him; his delight in troops of friends, in large
hospitality, in cheerful giving. Let Timon, let Warwick, let Antonio
the merchant, answer for his great heart. So far from Shakespeare’s
being the least known, he is the one person, in all modern history,
known to us. What point of morals, of manners, of economy, of
philosophy, of religion, of taste, of the conduct of life, has he not
settled? What mystery has he not signified his knowledge of? What
office, or function, or district of man’s work, has he not remembered?
What king has he not taught State, as Talma taught Napoleon? What
maiden has not found him finer than her delicacy? What lover has he
not outloved? What sage has he not outseen? What gentleman has he not
instructed in the rudeness of his behaviour?

                     “Shakespeare; or, the Poet.” _Representative
                         Men._ 1844, p. 154.


FREDERICK WILLIAM ROBERTSON, 1850

(1816-1853)

What I admire in Shakspeare, however, is that his loves are all
human—no earthliness hiding itself from itself in sentimental
transcendentalism—no loves of the angels, which are the least angelic
things, I believe, that float in the clouds, though they do look down
upon mortal feelings with contempt, just as the dark volumes of smoke
which issue from the long chimney of a manufactory might brood very
sublimely over the town which they blacken, and fancy themselves far
more ethereal than those vapours which steam up from the earth by day
and night. Yet these are pure water, and those are destined to condense
in black soot. So are the transcendentalisms of affection. Shakspeare
is healthy, true to Humanity in this: and for that reason I pardon him
even his earthly coarseness. You always know that you are on an earth
which has to be refined, instead of floating in the empyrean with wings
of wax. Therein he is immeasurably greater than Shelley. Shelleyism is
very sublime, sublimer a good deal than God, for God’s world is all
wrong and Shelley is all right—much purer than Christ, for Shelley can
criticise Christ’s heart and life—nevertheless, Shelleyism is only
atmospheric profligacy, to coin a Montgomeryism. I believe this to
be one of Shakespeare’s most wondrous qualities—the humanity of his
nature and heart. There is a spirit of sunny endeavour about him, and
an acquiescence in things as they are—not incompatible with a cheerful
resolve to make them better.

               _Life and Letters of Frederick W. Robertson, M.A._
                   Edited by Stopford A. Brooke, M.A. 1886,
                   vol. i. p. 289, Letter LX.


LEIGH HUNT, 1851

(1784-1859)

“_Associations with Shakespeare._”

How naturally the idea of Shakespeare can be made to associate itself
with anything which is worth mention! Take Christmas for instance:
“Shakespeare and Christmas”; the two ideas fall as happily together
as “wine and walnuts,” or heart and soul. So you may put together
“Shakespeare and May,” or “Shakespeare and June,” and twenty passages
start into your memory about spring and violets. Or you may say
“Shakespeare and Love,” and you are in the midst of a bevy of bright
damsels, as sweet as rosebuds; or “Shakespeare and Death,” and all
graves, and thoughts of graves, are before you; or “Shakespeare and
Life,” and you have the whole world of youth, and spirit, and Hotspur,
and life itself; or you may say even, “Shakespeare and Hate,” and he
will say all that can be said for hate, as well as against it, till you
shall take Shylock himself into your Christian arms, and tears shall
make you of one faith.

                                      _Table Talk._ 1851, p. 154.


JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE, 1852

(1818-1894)

We wonder at the grandeur, the moral majesty of some of Shakespeare’s
characters, so far beyond what the noblest among ourselves can imitate,
and at first thought we attribute it to the genius of the poet, who
has outstripped nature in his creations. But we are misunderstanding
the power and the meaning of poetry in attributing creativeness to
it in any such sense. Shakespeare created, but only as the spirit of
nature created around him, working in him as it worked abroad in those
among whom he lived. The men whom he draws were such men as he saw
and knew; the words they utter were such as he heard in the ordinary
conversations in which he joined. At the Mermaid with Raleigh and
with Sidney, and at a thousand unnamed English firesides, he found
the living originals for his Prince Hals, his Orlandos, his Antonios,
his Portias, his Isabellas. The closer personal acquaintance which we
can form with the English of the age of Elizabeth, the more we are
satisfied that Shakespeare’s great poetry is no more than the rhythmic
echo of the life which it depicts.

                 _Short Studies on Great Subjects._ First Series.
                     “England’s Forgotten Worthies.” 1878, i.
                     445-6, reprinted from _Westminster Review_.
                     1852.


DAVID MASSON, 1853

(_b._ 1822)

Shakespeare is as astonishing for the exuberance of his genius in
abstract notions, and for the depth of his analytic and philosophic
insight, as for the scope and minuteness of his poetic imagination.
It is as if into a mind poetical in _form_ there had been poured all
the _matter_ that existed in the mind of his contemporary Bacon. In
Shakespeare’s plays we have thought, history, exposition, philosophy,
all within the round of the poet. The only difference between him and
Bacon sometimes is that Bacon writes an essay and calls it his own,
while Shakespeare writes a similar essay and puts it into the mouth of
a Ulysses or a Polonius.

            _Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and Other Essays._ 1874.
                Essay V. p. 242, reprinted from _North British
                Review_. 1853.


MATTHEW ARNOLD, 1853

(1822-1888)

“_Shakespeare._”

    Others abide our question. Thou art free.
      We ask and ask—Thou smilest and art still,
      Out-topping knowledge. For the loftiest hill,
    Who to the stars uncrowns his majesty,
    Planting his steadfast footsteps in the sea,
      Making the heaven of heavens his dwelling-place,
      Spares but the cloudy border of his base
    To the foil’d searching of mortality;

    And thou, who didst the stars and sunbeams know,
      Self-school’d, self-scann’d, self-honour’d, self-secure,
    Didst tread on earth unguessed at.—Better so!
      All pains the immortal spirit must endure,
    All weakness which impairs, all griefs which bow,
    Find their sole speech in that victorious brow.

                                                   _Poems._ 1853.


WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, 1853

(1775-1864)

“_Shakespeare and Milton._”

    The tongue of England, that which myriads
    Have spoken and will speak, were paralysed
    Hereafter, but two mighty men stand forth
    Above the flight of ages, two alone;
    One crying out,
                    _All nations spoke thro’ me_.

    The other:
               True; and thro’ this trumpet burst
    God’s word; the fall of Angels, and the doom
    First of immortal, then of mortal, Man,
    Glory! be glory! not to me, to God.

                      _The Lost Fruit off an old Tree._ No. LVII.


JOHN HENRY NEWMAN, 1858

(1801-1890)

A great author, gentlemen, is not one who merely has a _copia
verborum_, whether in prose or verse, and can, as it were, turn on at
his will any number of splendid phrases and swelling sentences; but he
is one who has something to say and knows how to say it. I do not claim
for him, as such, any great depth of thought, or breadth of view, or
philosophy, or sagacity, or knowledge of human nature, or experience
of human life, though these additional gifts he may have, and the
more he has of them the greater he is; but I ascribe to him, as his
characteristic gift, in a large sense the faculty of Expression. He
is master of the twofold Logos, the thought and the word, distinct,
but inseparable from each other. He may, if so be, elaborate his
compositions, or he may pour out his improvisations, but in either
case he has but one aim, which he keeps steadily before him, and is
conscientious and single-minded in fulfilling. That aim is to give
forth what he has within him; and from his very earnestness it comes to
pass that, whatever be the splendour of his diction or the harmony of
his periods, he has with him the charm of an incommunicable simplicity.
Whatever be his subject, high or low, he treats it suitably and for its
own sake. If he is a poet, “nil molitur _inepte_.” If he is an orator,
then too he speaks, not only “distincte” and “splendide,” but also
“apte.” His page is the lucid mirror of his mind and life:

            “Quo fit, ut omnis
    Votivâ pateat veluti descripta labellâ
    Vita senis.”

He writes passionately, because he feels keenly; forcibly, because
he conceives vividly; he sees too clearly to be vague; he is too
serious to be otiose; he can analyse his subject, and therefore he is
rich; he embraces it as a whole and in its parts, and therefore he is
consistent; he has a firm hold of it, and therefore he is luminous;
when his imagination wells up, it overflows its ornament; when his
heart is touched, it thrills along his verse. He always has the right
word for the right idea, and never a word too much. If he is brief, it
is because few words suffice; when he is lavish of them, still each
word has its mark, and aids, not embarrasses, the vigorous march of
his elocution. He expresses what all feel, but all cannot say; and his
sayings pass into proverbs among his people, and his phrases become
household words and idioms of their daily speech, which is tessellated
with the rich fragments of his language, as we see in foreign lands the
marbles of Roman grandeur worked into the walls and pavements of modern
palaces.

Such pre-eminently is Shakespeare among ourselves; such pre-eminently
is Virgil among the Latins; such in their degree are all those writers
who in every nation go by the name of Classics.

              “The Idea of a University defined and illustrated.”
                  _Literature_, ix. 1873, pp. 291-3.


JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL, _c._ 1858

(1819-1891)

Only Shakespeare was endowed with that healthy equilibrium of nature
whose point of rest was midway between the imagination and the
understanding,—that perfectly unruffled brain which reflected all
objects with almost inhuman impartiality,—that outlook whose range was
ecliptical, dominating all zones of human thought and action,—that
power of verisimilar conception which could take away Richard
III. from History, and Ulysses from Homer,—and that creative
faculty whose equal touch is alike vivifying in Shallow and in Lear.
He alone never seeks in abnormal and monstrous characters to evade the
risks and responsibilities of absolute truthfulness, nor to stimulate a
jaded imagination by Caligulan horrors of plot. He is never, like many
of his fellow-dramatists, confronted with unnatural Frankensteins of
his own making, whom he must get off his hands as best he may. Given
a human foible, he can incarnate it in the nothingness of Slender, or
make it loom gigantic through the tragic twilight of Hamlet. We are
tired of the vagueness which classes all the Elizabethan playwrights
together as “great dramatists,”—as if Shakespeare did not differ from
them in kind as well as in degree. Fine poets some of them were; but
though imagination and the power of poetic expression are, singly, not
uncommon gifts, and even in combination not without secular examples,
yet it is the rarest of earthly phenomena to find them joined with
those faculties of perception, arrangement, and plastic instinct in
the loving union which alone makes a great dramatic poet possible.
We suspect that Shakespeare will long continue the only specimen of
the genus. His contemporaries, in their comedies, either force what
they call “a humour” till it becomes fantastical, or hunt for jokes,
like rat-catchers, in the sewers of human nature and of language.
In their tragedies they become heavy without grandeur, like Jonson,
or mistake the stilts for the cothurnus, as Chapman and Webster too
often do. Every new edition of an Elizabethan dramatist is but the
putting of another witness into the box to prove the inaccessibility of
Shakespeare’s standpoint as poet and artist.

                               _Library of Old Authors._ 1858-64.

    For an interesting note on Shakespeare’s “artistic discretion”
    and the “impersonality” of his writings, see “Shakespeare once
    more” (_Among My Books._ 1870, pp. 226-7).


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE, 1863

(1804-1864)

Shakespeare has surface beneath surface, to an immeasurable depth,
adapted to the plummet-line of every reader; his works present many
phases of truth, each with scope large enough to fill a contemplative
mind. Whatever you seek in him you will surely discover, provided
you seek truth. There is no exhausting the various interpretation of
his symbols; and a thousand years hence, a world of new readers will
possess a whole library of new books, as we ourselves do, in these
volumes old already.

                                    _Our Old Home._ 1863, i. 171.

    In _Our Old Home_ (i. 158-60) Hawthorne records his impressions
    on visiting Shakespeare’s house.


BISHOP CHARLES WORDSWORTH, 1864

(1806-1892)

Take the entire range of English literature; put together our best
authors, who have written upon subjects not professedly religious or
theological, and we shall not find, I believe, in them _all united_,
so much evidence of the Bible having been read and used, as we have
found in Shakespeare _alone_. This is a phenomenon which admits of
being looked at from several points of view; but I shall be content to
regard it solely in connection with the undoubted fact, that of all our
authors, Shakespeare is also, by general confession, the greatest and
the best. According to the testimony of Charles Lamb, a most competent
judge in regard to all the literary elements of the question, our poet,
“in his divine mind and manners, surpassed not only the great men his
contemporaries, but all mankind.” And, looking at this superiority from
my own point of view, I cannot but remark that, while most of the great
laymen of that great Elizabethan age—Lord Bacon, Sir Walter Raleigh,
the poet Spenser, Sir Philip Sidney, Lord Burleigh, Ben Jonson—have
paid homage to Christianity, if not always in their practice, yet in
the conviction of their understanding, none of them has done this so
fully or so effectively as Shakespeare.

                      “_On Shakespeare’s Knowledge and Use of the
                          Bible._” 1864, pp. 291-2.


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, 1864

(1809-1894)

    O land of Shakespeare! ours with all thy past,
      Till these last years that make the sea so wide,
    Think not the jar of battle’s trumpet-blast
      Has dulled our aching sense to joyous pride
    In every noble word thy sons bequeathed
      The air our fathers breathed!

    War-wasted, haggard, panting from the strife,
      We turn to other days and far-off lands,
    Live o’er in dreams the Poet’s faded life,
      Come with fresh lilies in our fevered hands
    To wreathe his bust, and scatter purple flowers,—
      Not his the need, but ours!

    We call those poets who are first to mark
      Through earth’s dull mist the coming of the dawn,—
    Who see in twilight’s gloom the first pale spark,
      While others only note that day is gone;
    For him the Lord of light the curtain rent
      That veils the firmament . . .

    With no vain praise we mock the stone-carved name
      Stamped once on dust that moved with pulsed breath,
    As thinking to enlarge that amplest fame
      Whose undimmed glories gild the night of death:
    We praise not star or sun; in these we see
      Thee, Father, only Thee!

    Thy gifts are beauty, wisdom, power, and love:
      We read, we reverence on this human soul,—
    Earth’s clearest mirror of the light above,—
      Plain as the record on Thy prophet’s scroll,
    When o’er his page the effluent splendours poured,
      Thine own, “Thus saith the Lord!”

    This player was a prophet from on high,
      Thine own elected. Statesman, poet, sage,
    For him Thy sovereign pleasure passed them by;
      Sidney’s fair youth, and Raleigh’s ripened age,
    Spenser’s chaste soul, and his imperial mind
      Who taught and shamed mankind.

                 “Shakespeare Tercentennial Celebration, 23 April
                     1864.” _Songs of Many Seasons._ 1875.


CARDINAL WISEMAN, 1865

(1802-1865)

We may compare the mind of Shakespeare to a diamond, pellucid, bright,
and untinted, cut into countless polished facets, which, in constant
movement, at every smallest change of direction or of angle, caught a
new reflection, so that not one of its brilliant mirrors could be for a
moment idle, but by a power beyond its control was ever busy with the
reflection of innumerable images, either distinct or running into one
another, or repeated each so clearly as to allow him, when he chose, to
fix it in his memory.

                              _William Shakespeare._ 1865, p. 50.


ARCHBISHOP RICHARD CHENEVIX TRENCH, 1865

(1807-1886)

    A counsellor well fitted to advise
      In daily life, and at whose lips no less
      Men may inquire or nations, when distress
    Of sudden doubtful danger may arise,
    Who, though his head be hidden in the skies,
      Plants his firm foot upon our common earth,
      Dealing with thoughts which everywhere have birth,—
    This is the poet, true of heart and wise:
    No dweller in a baseless world of dream,
      Which is not earth nor heaven: his words have passed
        Into man’s common thought and week-day phrase;
      This is the poet and his verse will last.
    Such was our Shakespeare once, and such doth seem
        One who redeems our later gloomier days.

                _Poems collected and arranged anew._ 1865, p. 83.


FRANCIS TURNER PALGRAVE, 1865

(1824-1897)

Only three or four generations of fairly long-lived men lie between
us and Shakespeare; literature in his own time had reached a high
development; his grandeur and sweetness were freely recognised; within
seventy years of his death his biography was attempted; yet we know
little more of Shakespeare himself than we do of Homer. Like several of
the greatest men,—Lucretius, Virgil, Tacitus, Dante,—a mystery never
to be dispelled hangs over his life. He has entered into the cloud.
With a natural and an honourable diligence, other men have given their
lives to the investigation of his, and many external circumstances,
mostly of a minor order, have been thus collected: yet of “the man
Shakespeare,” in Mr. Hallam’s words, we know nothing. Something which
seems more than human in immensity of range and calmness of insight
moves before us in the Plays; but, from the nature of dramatic writing,
the author’s personality is inevitably veiled; no letter, no saying
of his, or description by an intimate friend, has been preserved: and
even when we turn to the _Sonnets_, though each is an autobiographical
confession, we find ourselves equally foiled. These revelations of
the poet’s innermost nature appear to teach us less of the man than
the tone of mind which we trace, or seem to trace, in _Measure for
Measure_, _Hamlet_, and the _Tempest_: the strange imagery of passion
which passes over the magic mirror has no tangible existence before or
behind it:—the great artist, like Nature herself, is still latent in
his works; diffused through his own creation.

  .       .       .       .       .       .

Yet there is, after all, nothing more remarkable or fascinating in
English poetry than these personal revelations of the mind of our
greatest poet. We read them again and again, and find each time some
new proof of his almost superhuman insight into human nature; of his
unrivalled mastery over all the tones of love.

               _Songs and Sonnets of William Shakespeare._ Edited
                   by Francis Turner Palgrave. 1865, pp. 238-9
                   and 243.


FRANCES ANNE KEMBLE, 1866

(1809-1893)

“_To Shakespeare._”

    Shelter and succour such as common men
      Afford the weaker partners of their fate,
      Have I derived from thee—from thee, most great
    And powerful genius! whose sublime control
    Still from thy grave governs each human soul,
    That reads the wondrous record of thy pen.
    From sordid sorrows thou hast set me free,
      And turned from want’s grim ways my tottering feet,
    And to sad empty hours, given royally,
      A labour, than all leisure far more sweet.
    The daily bread, for which we humbly pray,
      Thou gavest me as if I were a child,
      And still with converse noble, wise, and mild,
    Charmed with despair my sinking soul away;
    Shall I not bless the need, to which was given
    Of all the angels in the host of heaven,
    Thee, for my guardian, spirit strong and bland!
    Lord of the speech of my dear native land!

                                            _Poems._ 1866, p. 61.


JOHN RUSKIN, 1868

(1819-1900)

It does not matter how little, or how much, any of us have read,
either of Homer, or Shakespeare: everything round us, in substance,
or in thought, has been moulded by them. All Greek gentlemen were
educated under Homer. All Roman gentlemen by Greek literature. All
Italian, and French, and English gentlemen, by Roman literature, and
by its principles. Of the scope of Shakespeare, I will say only, that
the intellectual measure of every man since born, in the domains of
creative thought, may be assigned to him, according to the degree in
which he has been taught by Shakespeare.

                    _The Mystery of Life and its Arts._ Afternoon
                        Lectures on Literature and Art, delivered
                        at Royal College of Science, St.
                        Stephen’s Green, Dublin, 1867 and 1868.
                        1869, p. 109.


DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI, 1871

(1828-1882)

“_On the Site of a Mulberry-Tree._”

_Planted by William Shakespeare; felled by the Rev. F. Gastrell._

    This tree, here fall’n, no common birth or death
      Shared with its kind. The world’s enfranchised son,
      Who found the trees of Life and Knowledge one,
    Here set it, frailer than his laurel-wreath.
    Shall not the wretch whose hand it fell beneath
      Rank also singly—the supreme unhung?
      Lo! Sheppard, Turpin, pleading with black tongue,
    This viler thief’s unsuffocated breath!

    We’ll search thy glossary, Shakespeare! whence almost,
      And whence alone, some name shall be reveal’d
        For this deaf drudge, to whom no length of years
        Sufficed to catch the music of the spheres;
      Whose soul is carrion now,—too mean to yield
    Some Starveling’s ninth allotment of a ghost.

           _Academy_, 15 Feb. 1871.[185:1] _Collected Works._ Ed.
               W. M. Rossetti. 1886, vol. i. p. 285.


FOOTNOTES:

[185:1] The last line in the earlier version—that printed in the
_Academy_—has “tailor’s” for “Starveling’s.” Rossetti made the
alteration from fear of offending sensitive members of the tailoring
profession.


BAYARD TAYLOR, 1872

(1825-1878)

“_Shakespeare’s Statue, Central Park, New York, 23 May 1872._”

          Here, in his right, he stands!
    No breadth of earth-dividing seas can bar
    The breeze of morning, or the morning star,
          From visiting our lands:
    His wit the breeze, his wisdom as the star,
    Shone where our earliest life was set, and blew
          To freshen hope and plan
          In brains American,—
    To urge, resist, encourage, and subdue!
    He came, a household ghost we could not ban:
    He sat, on winter nights, by cabin fires;
    His summer fairies linked their hands
          Along our yellow sands;
    He preached within the shadow of our spires;
    And when the certain Fate drew nigh, to cleave
    The birth-cord, and a separate being leave,
    He, in our ranks of patient-hearted men,
    Wrought with the boundless forces of his fame,
          Victorious, and became
    The Master of our thought, the land’s first Citizen!
          If, here, his image seem
    Of softer scenes and grayer skies to dream,
    Thatched cot and rustic tavern, ivied hall,
          The cuckoo’s April call
    And cowslip-meads beside the Avon stream,
    He shall not fail that other home to find
          We could not leave behind!
    The forms of Passion, which his fancy drew,
      In us their ancient likenesses beget:
    So, from our lives for ever born anew,
      He stands amid his own creations yet!
    Here comes lean Cassius, of conventions tired;
      Here, in his coach, luxurious Antony
    Beside his Egypt, still of men admired;
      And Brutus plans some purer liberty!
    A thousand Shylocks, Jew and Christian, pass;
      A hundred Hamlets, by their times betrayed;
    And sweet Anne Page comes tripping o’er the grass,
      And awkward Falstaff pants beneath the shade.
    Here toss upon the wanton summer wind
          The locks of Rosalind;
    Here some gay glove the damned spot conceals
          Which Lady Macbeth feels:
    His ease here smiling smooth Iago takes,
      And outcast Lear gives passage to his woe,
    And here some foiled Reformer sadly breaks
          His wand of Prospero!
      In liveried splendour, side by side,
      Nick Bottom and Titania ride,
      And Portia, flushed with cheers of men,
      Disdains dear faithful Imogen;
      And Puck beside the form of Morse,
      Stops on his forty-minute course;
      And Ariel from his swinging bough
      A blossom casts on Bryant’s brow,
    Until, as summoned from his brooding brain,
      He sees his children all again,
    In us, as on our lips, each fresh, immortal strain!

                 _Poetical Works._ Stanzas II.-III. 1880, p. 224.


WILLIAM MINTO, 1874

(1845-1893)

It is a favourite way with some eulogists of Shakespeare to deny him
all individuality whatsoever. He was not one man, they say, but an
epitome of all men. His mind, says Hazlitt, “had no one peculiar bias
or exclusive excellence more than another. He was just like any other
man, but that he was like all other men. He was the least of an egotist
that it was possible to be. He was nothing in himself; but he was all
that others were or that they could become.” Against such a degradation
of Shakespeare’s character, or of any man’s character, it is our duty
to protest. On trying to make Shakespeare more than human, the reckless
panegyrist makes him considerably less than human: instead of the man
whose prudence made him rich, whose affectionate nature made him loved
almost to idolatry, and whose genius has been the wonder of the world,
we are presented with plasticity in the abstract, an object not more
interesting than a quarry of potter’s clay.

                   “William Shakespeare, his Life and Character.”
                       _Characteristics of English Poets._ 1874,
                       p. 350.

    See the passage from Hazlitt’s _Lectures on the English Poets_,
    p. 135.


EDWARD DOWDEN, 1875

(_b._ 1843)

There are certain problems which Shakespeare at once pronounces
insoluble. He does not, like Milton, propose to give any account of
the origin of evil. He does not, like Dante, pursue the soul of man
through circles of unending torture, or spheres made radiant by the
eternal presence of God. Satan, in Shakespeare’s poems, does not come
voyaging on gigantic vans across Chaos to find the earth. No great
deliverer of mankind descends from the heavens. Here, upon the earth,
evil _is_—such was Shakespeare’s declaration in the most emphatic
accent. Iago actually exists. There is also in the earth a sacred
passion of deliverance, a pure redeeming ardour. Cordelia exists. This
Shakespeare can tell for certain. But how Iago can be, and why Cordelia
lies strangled across the breast of Lear—are these questions which
you go on to ask? Something has been already said of the severity of
Shakespeare. It is a portion of his severity to decline all answers
to such questions as these. Is ignorance painful? Well, then, it is
painful. Little solutions of your large difficulties can readily be
obtained from priest or _philosopher_. Shakespeare prefers to let you
remain in the solemn presence of a mystery. He does not invite you into
his little church or his little library brilliantly illuminated by
philosophical or theological rushlights. You remain in the darkness.
But you remain in the vital air. And the great night is overhead.

               _Shakspere: A Critical Study of his Mind and Art._
                   1875, p. 226.


GEORGE MEREDITH, 1877

(_b._ 1828)

Shakespeare is a well-spring of characters which are saturated with the
comic spirit; with more of what we will call blood-life than is to be
found anywhere out of Shakespeare; and they are of this world, but they
are of the world enlarged to our embrace by imagination, and by great
poetic imagination. They are, as it were—I put it to suit my present
comparison—creatures of the woods and wilds, not in walled towns, not
grouped and toned to pursue a comic exhibition of the narrower world of
society. Jaques, Falstaff and his regiment, the varied troop of clowns,
Malvolio, Sir Hugh Evans and Fluellen—marvellous Welshmen!—Benedict
[_sic_] and Beatrice, Dogberry, and the rest, are subjects of a special
study in the poetically comic.

              _On the Idea of Comedy and of the Uses of the Comic
                  Spirit._ A lecture delivered at the London
                  Institution, 1 Feb. 1877. Published 1897.


FREDERICK JAMES FURNIVALL, 1877

(_b._ 1825)

Altogether “a manly man” (as Chaucer says) this Shakespeare, strong,
tender, humourful, sensitive, impressionable, the truest friend,
the foe of none but narrow minds and base. And as we track his work
from the lightness and fun of its rise, through the fairy fancy, the
youthful passion, the rich imaginings, the ardent patriotism, the
brilliant sunshine, of his first and second times, through the tender
affection of his Sonnets, the whirlwind of passions in his Tragedies,
and then to the lovely sunset of his latest plays, what can we do but
bless his name, and be thankful that he came to be a delight, a lift
and strength, to us and our children’s children to all time—a bond that
shall last for ever between all English-speaking, English-reading men,
the members of that great Teutonic brotherhood which shall yet long
lead the world in the fight for freedom and for truth!

                         Introduction to _The Leopold Shakspere_.
                             1877, p. cxvi.


WALTER HORATIO PATER, 1878

(1839-1894)

As happens with every true dramatist, Shakespeare is for the most
part hidden behind the persons of his creation. Yet there are certain
of his characters in which we feel that there is something of
self-portraiture. And it is not so much in his grander, more subtle and
ingenious creations that we feel this—in “Hamlet” and “King Lear”—as
in those slighter and more spontaneously developed figures, who, while
far from playing principal parts, are yet distinguished by a peculiar
happiness and delicate ease in the drawing of them; figures which
possess, above all, that winning attractiveness which there is no man
but would willingly exercise, and which resemble those works of art
which, though not meant to be very great or imposing, are yet wrought
of the choicest material. Mercutio, in “Romeo and Juliet,” belongs to
this group of Shakespeare’s characters—versatile, mercurial people,
such as make good actors, and in whom the

    “Nimble spirits of the arteries,”

the finer but still merely animal elements of great wit, predominate.
A careful delineation of minor yet expressive traits seems to mark
them out as the characters of his predilection; and it is hard not
to identify him with these more than with others. Biron, in “Love’s
Labour’s Lost,” is perhaps the most striking member of this group.
In this character, which is never quite in touch, never quite on a
perfect level of understanding, with the other persons of the play, we
see, perhaps, a reflex of Shakespeare himself, when he has just become
able to stand aside from and estimate the first period of his poetry.

                   “Love’s Labour’s Lost.” _Appreciations with an
                       Essay on Style._ 1889, pp. 174-5.

    See also “Shakspere’s English Kings,” _ib._, pp. 201-2.


MATTHEW ARNOLD, 1879

(1822-1888)

Let me have the pleasure of quoting a sentence about Shakespeare, which
I met with by accident not long ago in the _Correspondant_, a French
review which not a dozen English people, I suppose, look at. The writer
is praising Shakespeare’s prose. “With Shakespeare,” he says, “prose
comes in whenever the subject, being more familiar, is unsuited to the
majestic English iambic.” And he goes on: “Shakespeare is the king of
poetic rhythm and style, as well as the king of the realm of thought;
along with his dazzling prose, Shakespeare has succeeded in giving us
the most varied, the most harmonious verse which has ever sounded upon
the human ear since the verse of the Greeks.” M. Henry Cochin, the
writer of this sentence, deserves our gratitude for it; it would not
be easy to praise Shakespeare, in a single sentence, more justly. And
when a foreigner and a Frenchman writes thus of Shakespeare, and when
Goethe says of Milton, in whom there was so much to repel Goethe rather
than to attract him, that “nothing has ever been done so entirely in
the sense of the Greeks as _Samson Agonistes_,” and that “Milton is
in very truth a poet whom we must treat with all reverence,” then we
understand what constitutes a European recognition of poets and poetry
as contradistinguished from a merely national recognition, and that
in favour both of Milton and of Shakespeare the judgment of the high
court of appeal has finally gone.

                _Essays in Criticism._ Second Series: Wordsworth.
                    1888, pp. 129-31. Reprinted from Preface to
                    _The Poems of Wordsworth_, chosen and edited
                    by Matthew Arnold. 1879.

    For a comment on Shakespeare’s double faculty of interpreting
    the physiognomy and movement of the outward world, and the
    ideas and laws of man’s moral and spiritual nature, see _Essays
    in Criticism_, 1865, p. 108.


ANONYMOUS ?_c._ 1880

So much has been written, so much spoken about Shakespeare, that it
would seem a needless, almost a presumptuous superfluity to say more,
and yet from another point of view, the man is as strange to us to-day
as though we had never heard his name. Johnson and Pope, Warburton,
Steevens, Malone and Theobald, Chalmers, Dyce, and a host of foreign
exegetes, have edited and annotated, emendated and obelised; but the
figure of Shakespeare is clothed in mist, and whilst we laugh and
wonder at the vanity and versatility of a Cicero, and stroll lovingly
with a Horace about his Sabine farm, dead both of them two millennia,
we still grope about in the dark for the meaning, the character,
and the inner life of our wondrous poet. Like the ghost in Hamlet,
he arose, and, having uttered his pregnant message, disappeared,
unregarded at the time but by a few, and still unrealised by the many.

  .       .       .       .       .       .       .

There is a grandeur about the poets of the world, and a reward for
those that study them aright. Amid the hurricane of battle and the
crash of empires, the calm pulse of life and the glories of the drama
remain the same. Men are inclined to gaze upon the outward symbols of
existence as though they were primary causes, when they are only the
emblems of a deeper power. We have had our Constitution-builders, but
where are they? Our Tamerlanes and our Attilas, but whither are they
departed? The intellect that revolves a kingdom pales before a heart
that speaks to the soul of man. All nations turn their faces toward
a Hamlet, a Lear, or a Catherine of Aragon. The influence of these
through the genius of the poet will spread and yield abundant fruit,
when the havoc of a Cannæ or an Austerlitz is but dimly discernible in
the skeleton of history.

The study of our finer literature is therefore the study of the soul;
and the progress made will be upward and inward, and the result
a purifying of the ideals and a chastening of the chords of man.
Shakespeare gives us all this, he is ennobling as well as instructive;
without paying homage in a measure to his memory by the maintenance of
a certain form of excellence, no poet since his time has succeeded in
being appreciated as great. For they all bear his mark, and although
much below him, all dramatic writers since his day are modelled upon
his plan.

                 Manuscript Note inserted before fly-leaf of copy
                     of the 1602 quarto of _Merry Wives of
                     Windsor_, now in Rowfant Library. Printed in
                     _A Catalogue of the Printed Books, etc.,
                     collected since 1886 by the late Frederick
                     Locker Lampson_. 1900, pp. 28-30.


ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE, 1880

(_b._ 1837)

In his first stage Shakespeare had dropped his plummet no deeper into
the sea of the spirit of man than Marlowe had sounded before him; and
in the channel of simple emotion no poet could cast surer line with
steadier hand than he. Further down in the dark and fiery depths of
human pain and mortal passion no soul could search than his who first
rendered into speech the aspirations and the agonies of a ruined and
revolted spirit. And until Shakespeare found in himself the strength of
eyesight to read, and the cunning of handiwork to render those wider
diversities of emotion and those further complexities of character
which lay outside the range of Marlowe, he certainly cannot be said
to have outrun the winged feet, outstripped the fiery flight of his
forerunner. In the heaven of our tragic song, the first-born star on
the forehead of its herald god was not outshone till the full midsummer
meridian of that greater godhead before whom he was sent to prepare
a pathway for the sun. Through all the forenoon of our triumphant
day, till the utter consummation and ultimate ascension of dramatic
poetry incarnate and transfigured in the master-singer of the world,
the quality of his tragedy was as that of Marlowe’s, broad, single,
and intense; large of hand, voluble of tongue, direct of purpose.
With the dawn of its latter epoch a new power comes upon it, to find
clothing and expression in new forms of speech and after a new style.
The language has put off its foreign decorations of lyric and elegiac
ornament; it has found already its infinite gain in the loss of those
sweet superfluous graces which encumbered the march and enchained the
utterance of its childhood. The figures which it invests are now no
more types of a single passion, the incarnations of a single thought.
They now demand a scrutiny which tests the power of a mind and tries
the value of a judgment; they appeal to something more than the instant
apprehension which sufficed to respond to the immediate claim of those
that went before them. Romeo and Juliet were simply lovers, and their
names bring back to us no further thought than of their love and the
lovely sorrow of its end; Antony and Cleopatra shall be before all
things lovers, but the thought of their love and its triumphant tragedy
shall recall other things beyond number—all the forces and all the
fortunes of mankind, all the chance and all the consequence that waited
on their imperial passion, all the infinite variety of qualities and
powers wrought together and welded into the frame and composition of
that love which shook from end to end all nations and kingdoms of the
earth.

                        _A Study of Shakespeare._ 1880, pp. 77-9.


ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE, 1882

(_b._ 1837)

“_William Shakespeare._”

    Not if men’s tongues and angels’ all in one
        Spake, might the word be said that might speak thee.
        Streams, winds, woods, flowers, fields, mountains, yea the sea,
    What power is in them all to praise the sun?
    His praise is this,—he can be praised of none.
        Man, woman, child, praise God for him; but he
        Exults not to be worshipped, but to be.
    He is; and, being, beholds his work well done.
    All joy, all glory, all sorrow, all strength, all mirth,
    Are his: without him, day were night on earth.
        Time knows not his from time’s own period.
    All lutes, all harps, all viols, all flutes, all lyres,
    Fall dumb before him ere one string suspires.
        All stars are angels; but the sun is God.

                          _Tristram of Lyonesse and other Poems._
                              1882, p. 280.

    See also Mr. Swinburne’s _An Autumn Vision, October 31, 1889_.


GEORGE MEREDITH, 1883

(_b._ 1828)

“_The Spirit of Shakespeare._”

    Thy greatest knew thee, Mother Earth; unsoured
      He knew thy sons. He probed from hell to hell
    Of human passions, but of love deflowered
      His wisdom was not, for he knew thee well.
    Thence came the honeyed corner of his lips,
      The conquering smile wherein his spirit sails
    Calm as the God who the white sea-wave whips,
      Yet full of speech and intershifting tales,
    Close mirrors of us: thence had he the laugh
      We feel is thine: broad as ten thousand beeves
    At pasture! thence thy songs, that winnow chaff
      From grain, bid sick Philosophy’s last leaves
    Whirl, if they have no recompense—they enforced
    To fatten Earth when from her soul divorced.

    How smiles he at a generation ranked
      In gloomy noddings over life! They pass.
    Not he to feed upon a breast unthanked,
      Or eye a beauteous face in a cracked glass.
    But he can spy that little twist of brain
      Which moved some mighty leader of the blind,
    Unwitting ’twas the goad of personal pain,
      To view in curst eclipse our Mother’s mind,
    And show us of some rigid harridan
      The wretched bondman till the end of time.
    O lived the Master now to paint us Man,
      That little twist of brain would ring a chime
    Of whence it came and what it caused, to start
    Thunders of laughter, clearing air and heart.

                          _Poems and Lyrics of the Joy of Earth._
                              1883, pp. 161-2.


ROBERT BROWNING, 1884

(1812-1889)

“_The Names._”

    Shakespeare!—to such name’s sounding, what succeeds
        Fitly as a silence? Falter forth the spell,—
        Act follows word, the speaker knows full well,
    Nor tampers with its magic more than needs.
    Two names there are: That which the Hebrew reads
        With his soul only: if from lips it fell,
        Echo, back thundered by earth, heaven and hell,
    Would own, “Thou didst create us!” Nought impedes
    We voice the other name, man’s most of might,
        Awesomely, lovingly: let awe and love
    Mutely await their working, leave to sight
        All of the issue as below—above—
        Shakespeare’s creation rises: one remove
    Though dread—this finite from that infinite.

                    _Complete Poetic and Dramatic Works of Robert
                        Browning._ Cambridge edition, U.S.A.
                        1895.

    Browning wrote this sonnet as a contribution to the
    _Shakespearean Show-Book_ issued at the “Shakespearean Show”
    held in the Albert Hall, London, 29-31 May 1884, in aid of the
    Hospital for Women in Fulham Road. The sonnet is dated 12 March
    1884.


WILLIAM WETMORE STORY, 1886

(_b._ 1819)

“_The Mighty Makers._”

    Whose are those forms august that, in the press
        And busy blames and praises of to-day,
        Stand so serene above life’s fierce affray
    With ever youthful strength and loveliness?
    Those are the mighty makers, whom no stress
        Of time can shame, nor fashion sweep away,
        Whom Art begot on Nature in the play
    Of healthy passion, scorning base excess.
    Rising perchance in mists, and half obscure
        When up the horizon of their age they came,
          Brighter with years they shine in steadier light,
    Great constellations that will aye endure,
        Though myriad meteors of ephemeral fame
          Across them flash, to vanish into night.

    Such was our Chaucer in the early prime
        Of English verse, who held to Nature’s hand
        And walked serenely through its morning land,
    Gladsome and hale, brushing its dewy rime.
    And such was Shakespeare, whose strong soul could climb
        Steeps of sheer terror, sound the ocean grand
        Of passions deep, or over Fancy’s strand
    Trip with his fairies, keeping step and time.
    His too the power to laugh out full and clear,
        With unembittered joyance, and to move
        Along the silent, shadowy paths of love
    As tenderly as Dante, whose austere
        Stern spirit through the worlds below, above,
    Unsmiling strode, to tell their tidings here.

                               _Poems._ 1886, vol. ii. pp. 273-4.


THOMAS SPENCER BAYNES, 1886

(1823-1887)

Shakespeare’s work alone can be said to possess the organic strength
and infinite variety, the throbbing fulness, vital complexity, and
breathing truth of Nature herself. In points of artistic resource and
technical ability—such as copious and expressive diction, freshness and
pregnancy of verbal combination, richly modulated verse, and structural
skill in the handling of incident and action—Shakespeare’s supremacy
is indeed sufficiently assured. But, after all, it is of course in the
spirit and substance of his work, his power of piercing to the hidden
centres of character, of touching the deepest springs of impulse and
passion, out of which are the issues of life, and of evolving those
issues dramatically with a flawless strength, subtlety, and truth,
which raises him so immensely above and beyond not only the best of
the playwrights who went before him, but the whole line of illustrious
dramatists that came after him. It is Shakespeare’s unique distinction
that he has an absolute command over all the complexities of thought
and feeling that prompt to action and bring out the dividing lines of
character. He sweeps with the hand of a master the whole gamut of human
experience, from the lowest note to the very top of its compass, from
the sportive childish treble of Mamilius, and the pleading boyish tones
of Prince Arthur, up to the spectre-haunted terrors of Macbeth, the
tropical passion of Othello, the agonised sense and tortured spirit
of Hamlet, the sustained elemental grandeur, the Titanic force, the
utterly tragical pathos of Lear.

                     _Encyclopædia Britannica._ 9th edition. Art.
                         “Shakespeare.” Vol. xxi. 1886, p. 763.


GERALD MASSEY, 1888

(_b._ 1828)

    Our Prince of Peace in glory hath gone,
    With no Spear shaken, no Sword drawn,
    No Cannon fired, no flag unfurled,
    To make his conquest of the World.

    For him no Martyr-fires have blazed,
    No limbs been racked, no scaffolds raised;
    For him no life was ever shed,
    To make the Victor’s pathway red.

    And for all time he wears the Crown
    Of lasting, limitless renown:
    He reigns, whatever Monarchs fall;
    His Throne is in the heart of all.

               _The Secret Drama of Shakespeare’s Sonnets._ 1888.


WALT WHITMAN, 1890

(1819-1892)

The inward and outward characteristics of Shakespeare are his vast and
rich variety of persons and themes, with his wondrous delineation of
each and all—not only limitless funds of verbal and pictorial resource,
but great excess, superfœtation—mannerism, like a fine aristocratic
perfume, holding a touch of musk (Euphues, his mark)—with boundless
sumptuousness and adornment, real velvet and gems, not shoddy nor
paste—but a good deal of bombast and fustian—(certainly some terrific
mouthing in Shakespeare!).

Superb and inimitable as all is, it is mostly an objective and
physiological kind of power and beauty the soul finds in Shakespeare—a
style supremely grand of the sort, but in my opinion stopping short of
the grandest sort, at any rate for fulfilling and satisfying modern
and scientific and democratic American purposes. Think, not of growths
as forests primeval, or Yellowstone geysers, or Colorado ravines, but
of costly marble palaces, and palace rooms, and the noblest fixings
and furniture, and noble owners and occupants to correspond—think of
carefully built gardens from the beautiful but sophisticated gardening
art at its best, with walks and bowers and artificial lakes, and
appropriate statue groups, and the finest cultivated roses and lilies
and japonicas in plenty—and you have the tally of Shakespeare. The
low characters, mechanics, even the loyal henchmen—all in themselves
nothing—serve as capital foils to the aristocracy. The comedies
(exquisite as they certainly are), bringing in admirably portrayed
common characters, have the unmistakable hue of plays, portraits, made
for the divertisement only of the élite of the castle, and from its
point of view. The comedies are altogether non-acceptable to America
and Democracy.

But to the deepest soul, it seems a shame to pick and choose from the
riches Shakespeare has left us—to criticise his infinitely royal,
multiform quality—to gauge, with optic glasses, the dazzle of his
sun-like beams.

             From _Poet-Lore_, July 1890. _Complete Prose Works._
                 Boston, Mass., 1898, p. 394.

    Walt Whitman, when he says that “the comedies are altogether
    non-acceptable to America and Democracy,” states rather what
    he considers ought to be, than what actually is. In his essay,
    “Poetry To-day in America,” he says of Shakespeare, “In
    portraying mediæval European lords and barons, the arrogant
    poet, so dear to the inmost human heart (pride! pride! dearest,
    perhaps, of all—touching us, too, of the States closest of
    all—closer than love), he stands alone, and I do not wonder he
    so witches the world.”—_Prose Works_, Boston, 1898, p. 283.


RICHARD WATSON GILDER, 1891

(_b._ 1844)

“_The Twenty-Third of April._”

    A little English earth and breathèd air
      Made Shakespeare the divine; so is his verse
    The broidered soil of every blossom fair;
      So doth his song all sweet bird-songs rehearse.
    But tell me, then, what wondrous stuff did fashion
      That part of him which took those wilding flights
    Among imagined worlds; whence the white passion
      That burned three centuries through the days and nights!
    Not heaven’s four winds could make, nor round the earth,
      The soul wherefrom the soul of Hamlet flamed;
    Nor anything of merely mortal birth
      Could lighten as when Shakespeare’s name is named.
    How was his body bred we know full well,
    But that high soul’s engendering who may tell!

                      “Five Books of Song.” IV. _The Two Worlds._
                          1894, p. 154.


MATHILDE BLIND, _c._ 1894

(1841-1896)

“_Shakespeare._”

    Yearning to know herself for all she was,
      Her passionate clash of warring good and ill,
      Her new life ever ground in Death’s old mill,
    With every delicate detail and _en masse_,—
    Blind Nature strove. Lo, then it came to pass,
      That Time, to work out her unconscious will,
      Once wrought the mind which she had groped to fill,
    And she beheld herself as in a glass.

    The world of men, unrolled before our sight,
      Showed like a map, where stream and waterfall,
    And village-cradling vale and cloud-capped height
      Stand faithfully recorded, great and small,
    For Shakespeare was, and at his touch with light
      Impartial as the sun’s, revealed the All.

                “Shakespeare Sonnets, VII.” _Poetical Works._ Ed.
                    Arthur Symons. 1900, p. 443.


ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON, BEFORE 1892

(1809-1892)

There are three repartees in Shakespeare which always bring tears to my
eyes from their simplicity.

One is in _King Lear_, when Lear says to Cordelia, “So young and so
untender,” and Cordelia lovingly answers, “So young, my lord, and
true.” And in _The Winter’s Tale_, when Florizel takes Perdita’s hand
to lead her to the dance, and says, “So turtles pair that never mean
to part,” and the little Perdita answers, giving her hand to Florizel,
”I’ll swear for ’em.” And in _Cymbeline_, when Imogen in tender rebuke
says to her husband:

    “Why did you throw your wedded lady from you?
     Think that you are upon a rock; and now,
     Throw me again!”

and Posthumus does not ask forgiveness, but answers, kissing her:

                    “Hang there like fruit, my soul,
    Till the tree die.”

                   _Life and Works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson._ Ed.
                       Hallam, Lord Tennyson. 1898, vol. iv. pp.
                       39 _et seq._

    See also _ib._, pp. 39-43.


SIDNEY LEE, 1899

(_b._ 1859)

Shakespeare’s mind, as Hazlitt suggested, contained within itself the
germs of all faculty and feeling. He knew intuitively how every faculty
and feeling would develop in any conceivable change of fortune. Men
and women—good or bad, old or young, wise or foolish, merry or sad,
rich or poor—yielded their secrets to him, and his genius enabled him
to give being in his pages to all the shapes of humanity that present
themselves on the highway of life. Each of his characters gives voice
to thought or passion with an individuality and a naturalness that
rouse in the intelligent playgoer and reader the illusion that they are
overhearing men and women speak unpremeditatingly among themselves,
rather than that they are reading written speeches or hearing written
speeches recited. The more closely the words are studied, the completer
the illusion grows. Creatures of the imagination—fairies, ghosts,
witches—are delineated with a like potency, and the reader or spectator
feels instinctively that these supernatural entities could not speak,
feel, or act otherwise than Shakespeare represents them. The creative
power of poetry was never manifested to such effect as in the corporeal
semblances in which Shakespeare clad the spirits of the air.

So mighty a faculty sets at nought the common limitations of
nationality, and in every quarter of the globe to which civilised life
has penetrated, Shakespeare’s power is recognised. All the world over,
language is applied to his creations that ordinarily applies to beings
of flesh and blood. Hamlet and Othello, Lear and Macbeth, Falstaff and
Shylock, Brutus and Romeo, Ariel and Caliban are studied in almost
every civilised tongue as if they were historic personalities, and the
chief of the impressive phrases that fall from their lips are rooted
in the speech of civilised humanity. To Shakespeare the intellect of
the world, speaking in divers accents, applies with one accord his own
words: “How noble in reason! how infinite in faculty! in apprehension
how like a god!”

                  _Life of William Shakespeare._ 1899, chap. xxi.




PART II

“GOOD SENTENCES”


    Good sentences.

                                 _Merchant of Venice_, I. ii. 11.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Brief, short, quick, snap.

                                         _Merry Wives_, IV. v. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

    In the quick forge and working-house of thought.

                                          _Henry V._ V. prol. 23.

       *       *       *       *       *

    A good swift simile.

                                _Taming of the Shrew_, V. ii. 54.




“GOOD SENTENCES”


    Shakespeare, we must be silent in thy praise,
    ’Cause our encomions will but blast thy bays,
    Which envy could not, that thou didst so well,
    Let thine own histories prove thy chronicle.

                        ANONYMOUS. Epig. 25. _Witts Recreations._
                            1640, printed 1639.

       *       *       *       *       *

    To-day we bring old gather’d herbs, ’tis true,
    But such as in sweet Shakespeare’s garden grew.
    And all his plants immortal you esteem,
    Your mouths are never out of taste with him.

                 JOHN CROWNE (_d._ 1703?). Prologue to _Henry the
                     Sixth, the First Part_. Adapted from
                     Shakespeare’s _1 Henry VI._ 1681. Sig. A2.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Shakespeare (whom you and every playhouse bill
    Style the divine, the matchless, what you will)
    For gain, not glory, wing’d his roving flight,
    And grew immortal in his own despite.

              ALEXANDER POPE (1688-1744). _Imitations of Horace._
                  Bk. II. ch. i. ll. 69-72. 1737.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Thrice happy! could we catch great Shakespeare’s art,
    To trace the deep recesses of the heart;
    His simple plain sublime, to which is given
    To strike the soul with darted flame from heaven.

                  JAMES THOMSON (1700-1748). Prologue to _Tancred
                      and Sigismundâ_. 1745. Sig. A4.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Let others seek a monumental fame,
    And leave for one short age a pompous name;
    Thou dost not e’en this little tomb require,
    Shakespeare can only with the world expire.

              Epitaph on a Tombstone of Shakespeare. _Gentleman’s
                  Magazine._ June 1767, vol. xxvii. p. 324.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare came out of Nature’s hand like Pallas out of Jove’s head,
at full growth and mature.

                          GEORGE COLMAN (1733-1794), before 1767.

    George Colman, who advocated the theory that Shakespeare had
    some classic learning, commenting in the Appendix to the second
    edition of his translation of the comedies of Terence (1768)
    on Richard Farmer’s _Essay on the Learning of Shakespeare_
    (1767), which maintains that Shakespeare got his knowledge of
    the ancients from translations, says: “Mr. Farmer closes these
    general testimonies of Shakespeare’s having been only indebted
    to Nature, by saying, ‘He came out of her hand, _as some one
    else expresses it_, like Pallas out of Jove’s head, at full
    growth and mature.’ It is whimsical enough, that this _some
    one else_, whose expression is here quoted to countenance the
    general notion of Shakespeare’s want of literature, should be
    no other than myself. Mr. Farmer does not choose to mention
    where he met with this expression of _some one else_; and _some
    one else_ does not choose to mention where he dropped it.”
    Colman’s “Appendix” was printed in the “Variorum” editions of
    Shakespeare, and that of 1785 gave an anonymous note, stating
    that Young “in his _Conjectures on Original Composition_ (vol.
    v. p. 100, ed. 1773) has the following sentence: ‘An adult
    genius comes out of Nature’s hands, as Pallas out of Jove’s
    head, at full growth and mature.’ Shakespeare’s genius was
    of this kind.” Young’s _Conjectures_ appeared in 1759, so
    perhaps Colman borrowed, though, as he says (_Prose on Several
    Occasions_, 1787, ii. p. 186), “The thought is obvious, and
    might, without improbability, occur to different writers.” At
    any rate, his form of the thought is better than Young’s, so he
    has here been given the credit for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

    To mark her Shakespeare’s worth, and Britain’s love,
    Let Pope design, and Burlington approve:
    Superfluous care! when distant times shall view
    This tomb grown old—his works shall still be new.

                       RICHARD GRAVES (1715-1804). “On erecting a
                           Monument to Shakespeare under the
                           direction of Mr. Pope and Lord
                           Burlington.” _Euphrosyne_, 1776.

    This refers to the monument erected by public subscription in
    Westminster Abbey in 1741. The design was by William Kent, and
    the statue of Shakespeare, which was part of it, was executed
    by Peter Scheemachers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our modern tragedies, hundreds of them do not contain a good line; nor
are they a jot the better, because Shakespeare, who was superior to all
mankind, wrote some whole plays that are as bad as any of our present
writers’.

                 HORACE WALPOLE (1717-1797). Letter to Sir Horace
                     Mann, Oct. 8, 1778. _Letters._ Ed. Peter
                     Cunningham, 1858, vol. vii. p. 135.

       *       *       *       *       *

Write like Shakespeare, and laugh at the critics.

                 DANIEL WEBB (1719?-1798). _Literary Amusements_,
                     1787, p. 22.

       *       *       *       *       *

                    Shakespeare, . . .
    Lord of the mighty spell: around him press
    Spirits and fairy forms. He, ruling wide
      His visionary world, bids terror fill
      The shivering breast, or softer pity thrill
    E’en to the inmost heart.

                         W. L. BOWLES (1762-1850). “Monody on the
                             Death of Dr. Warton,” 1801. _Poems_,
                             1803, vol. ii. pp. 141-2.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Is there no bard of heavenly power possess’d,
    To thrill, to rouse, to animate the breast?
    Like Shakespeare o’er the sacred mind to sway,
    And call each wayward passion to obey?

                           F. D. HEMANS (1793-1835). “England and
                               Spain,” 1807.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our love of Shakespeare, therefore, is not a _monomania_ or solitary
and unaccountable infatuation; but is merely the natural love which
all men bear to those forms of excellence that are accommodated to
their peculiar character, temperament, and situation; and which will
always return, and assert its power over their affections, long after
authority has lost its reverence, fashions been antiquated, and
artificial tastes passed away.

                     FRANCIS LORD JEFFREY (1773-1850). _Edinburgh
                         Review_, Aug. 1811, vol. xviii. p. 285.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare had the inward clothing of a fine mind; the outward
covering of solid reading, of critical observation, and the richest
eloquence; and compared with these, what are the trappings of the
schools?

                        GEORGE DYER (1755-1841). “The Relation of
                            Poetry to the Arts and Sciences,” in
                            _The Reflector_, 1811. Reprinted in
                            _Poetics_, 1812, ii. p. 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare has been accused of profaneness. I for my part have
acquired from perusal of him, a habit of looking into my own heart,
and am confident that Shakespeare is an author of all others the most
calculated to make his readers better as well as wiser.

         S. T. COLERIDGE (1772-1834). “Outline of an introductory
             Lecture on Shakespeare,” 1812.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let no man blame his son for learning history from Shakespeare.

                _Id._ _Seven Lectures on Shakespeare and Milton._
                    Ed. J. P. Collier, p. 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

The greatest genius that, perhaps, human nature has yet produced, our
_myriad-minded_[232:1] Shakespeare.

                    _Id._ _Biographia Literaria_, 1817, chap. xv.


FOOTNOTES:

[232:1] Coleridge says that he borrowed this phrase from a Greek monk,
who applied it to a Patriarch of Constantinople.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great, ever-living, dead man.

                                                          _Ibid._

       *       *       *       *       *

                          Humanity’s divinest son,
    That sprightliest, gravest, wisest, kindest one—
    Shakespeare.

                    LEIGH HUNT (1784-1859). _Thoughts of the Avon
                        on 28 Sept. 1817._

       *       *       *       *       *

His plays alone are properly expressions of the passions, not
descriptions of them. His characters are real beings of flesh and
blood; they speak like men, not like authors.

                     WILLIAM HAZLITT (1778-1830). “On Shakespeare
                         and Milton,” _Lectures on the English
                         Poets_, 1818, p. 98.

       *       *       *       *       *

In trying to recollect any other author, one sometimes stumbles, in
case of failure, on a word as good. In Shakespeare, any other word but
the true one, is sure to be wrong.[234:1]

                                                 _Ibid._, p. 108.


FOOTNOTES:

[234:1] “These remarks,” Hazlitt adds, “are strictly applicable only
to the impassioned parts of Shakespeare’s language, which flowed from
the warmth and originality of his imagination, and were his own. The
language used for prose conversation and ordinary business is sometimes
technical, and involved in the affectation of the time.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare was the least of a coxcomb of any one that ever lived, and
much of a gentleman.

                                                 _Ibid._, p. 111.

       *       *       *       *       *

    . . . Divinest Shakespeare’s might
    Fills Avon and the world with light,
    Like omniscient power which he
    Imaged ’mid mortality.

                  P. B. SHELLEY (1792-1822). “Lines written among
                      the Euganean Hills,” October 1818.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare led a life of allegory: his works are the comments on it.

                     JOHN KEATS (1795-1821). Letter to George and
                         Georgiana Keats, 18 Feb. 1819.

       *       *       *       *       *

If we wish to know the force of human genius, we should read
Shakespeare. If we wish to see the insignificance of human learning, we
may study his commentators.

                 WILLIAM HAZLITT (1778-1830). _Table Talk_, 1821,
                     vol. i. p. 177.

       *       *       *       *       *

    . . . Shakespeare, who in our hearts for himself hath erected an empire
    Not to be shaken by time, nor e’er by another divided.

                         ROBERT SOUTHEY (1774-1843). _A Vision of
                             Judgment_, 1821, ix. ll. 17, 18.

       *       *       *       *       *

I look upon him to be the worst of models, though the most
extraordinary of writers.

                        LORD BYRON (1788-1824). Letter to Murray,
                            14 July 1821. Moore’s _Life of
                            Byron_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Schiller has the material sublime: to produce an effect, he sets you
a whole town on fire, and throws infants with their mothers into the
flames, or locks up a father in an old tower. But Shakespeare drops a
handkerchief, and the same or greater effects follow.

                       S. T. COLERIDGE (1772-1834). _Table Talk_,
                           29 Dec. 1822.

       *       *       *       *       *

                          An immortal man,—
    Nature’s chief darling, and illustrious mate,
      Destined to foil old Death’s oblivious plan,
    And shine untarnish’d by the fogs of Fate,
    Time’s famous rival till the final date!

                        THOMAS HOOD (1799-1845). _The Plea of the
                            Midsummer Fairies_, cv. 1827, p. 53.

       *       *       *       *       *

Who knows or can figure what the Man Shakespeare was, by the first, by
the twentieth, perusal of his works? He is a Voice coming to us from
the Land of Melody: his old brick dwelling-place, in the mere earthly
burgh of Stratford-on-Avon, offers us the most inexplicable enigma.

          THOMAS CARLYLE (1795-1881). _Critical and Miscellaneous
              Essays_, “Goethe.” Reprinted from _Foreign Review_,
              No. 3, 1828.

       *       *       *       *       *

Students of poetry admire Shakespeare in their tenth year; but go on
admiring him more and more, understanding him more and more, till their
threescore-and-tenth.

                                                          _Ibid._

       *       *       *       *       *

No one can understand Shakespeare’s superiority fully until he has
ascertained, by comparison, all that which he possessed in common with
several other great dramatists of his age, and has then calculated the
surplus which is entirely Shakespeare’s own.

                       S. T. COLERIDGE (1772-1834). _Table Talk_,
                           12 May 1830.

       *       *       *       *       *

    His was the wizard spell,
      The spirit to enchain:
    His grasp o’er nature fell,
      Creation own’d his reign.

                  “Poetical Portraits” by A Modern Pythagorean in
                  _Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine_, vol. xxvii.
                  1830, p. 632.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not too much to say, that the great plays of Shakespeare would
lose less by being deprived of all the passages which are commonly
called the fine passages, than those passages lose by being read
separately from the play. This is, perhaps, the highest praise which
can be given to a dramatist.

                   LORD MACAULAY (1800-1859). _Edinburgh Review_,
                       June 1831, vol. liii. pp. 567-8.

       *       *       *       *       *

I believe Shakespeare was not a whit more intelligible in his own day
than he is now to an educated man, except for a few local allusions
of no consequence. And I said, he is of no age—nor, I may add, of
any religion, or party, or profession. The body and substance of his
works came out of the unfathomable depths of his own oceanic mind: his
observation and reading, which were considerable, supplied him with the
drapery of his figures.

                       S. T. COLERIDGE (1772-1834). _Table Talk_,
                           15 March 1834.

       *       *       *       *       *

I would be willing to live only as long as Shakespeare were the mirror
to Nature.

                            _Id._, _Letters_, etc., 1836, i. 196.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Than Shakespeare and Petrarch pray who are more living?
    Whose words more delight us? whose touches more _touch_?

                   LEIGH HUNT (1784-1859). “Blue-stocking Revels;
                       or, the Feast of the Violets.” Canto III.
                       _Monthly Repository_, 1837.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the gravest sense it may be affirmed of Shakespeare, that he is
among the modern luxuries of life.

                        T. DE QUINCEY (1785-1859). “Shakespeare,”
                            _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 7th ed.,
                            1842. Written 1838.

       *       *       *       *       *

Produce us from any drama of Shakespeare one of those leading passages
that all men have by heart, and show us any eminent defect in the very
sinews of the thought. It is impossible; defects there may be, but they
will always be found irrelevant to the main central thought, or to its
expression.

                _Id._ “Pope,” _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 7th ed.,
                    1842. Written 1839.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare, a wool-comber, poacher, or whatever else at Stratford in
Warwickshire, who happened to write books! The finest human figure, as
I apprehend, that Nature has hitherto seen fit to make of our widely
diffused Teutonic clay. Saxon, Norman, Celt or Sarmat, I find no human
soul so beautiful, these fifteen hundred known years;—our supreme
modern European man.

                      THOMAS CARLYLE (1795-1881). “Geschichte der
                          Teutschen Sippschaft,” translated by
                          Carlyle in _Chartism_, 1839. _Critical
                          and Miscellaneous Essays._

       *       *       *       *       *

It is to be doubted whether even Shakespeare could have told a story
like Homer, owing to that incessant activity and superfœtation of
thought, a little less of which might be occasionally desired even in
his plays;—if it were possible, once possessing anything of his, to
wish it away.

                        LEIGH HUNT (1784-1859). “What is Poetry?”
                            _Imagination and Fancy_, 1844. Ed.
                            A. S. Cook, 1893, p. 65.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, literature, philosophy, and thought are Shakespearised. His mind
is the horizon beyond which, at present, we do not see.

                       R. W. EMERSON (1803-1882). “Representative
                           Men.” _Shakespeare; or the Poet_, 1844.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Shakespeare, on whose forehead climb
    The crowns o’ the world: O eyes sublime,
    With tears and laughter for all time!

                 E. B. BROWNING (1809-1861). _A Vision of Poets_,
                     1844.

       *       *       *       *       *

A rib of Shakespeare would have made a Milton: the same portion of
Milton, all poets born ever since.

             W. S. LANDOR (1775-1846). “Imaginary Conversations.”
                 _Works_, 1846, ii. p. 74.

       *       *       *       *       *

    In poetry there is but one supreme,
    Tho’ there are many angels round his throne,
    Mighty, and beauteous, while his face is hid.

                               _Id._ “On Shakespeare.” “Poems and
                                   Epigrams.” _Works_, 1846.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long list can be cited of passages in Shakespeare, which have been
solemnly denounced by many eminent men (all blockheads) as ridiculous:
and if a man _does_ find a passage in a tragedy that displeases him, it
is sure to seem ludicrous: witness the indecent exposures of themselves
made by Voltaire, La Harpe, and many billions beside of bilious people.

                 T. DE QUINCEY (1785-1859). “Schlosser’s Literary
                     History.” _Tait’s Magazine_, Sept., Oct.,
                     1847.

       *       *       *       *       *

    A thousand poets pried at life,
    And only one amid the strife
    Rose to be Shakespeare.

                      R. BROWNING (1812-1889). _Christmas Eve and
                          Christmas Day_, xvi., 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I began to give myself up to the profession of a poet for life,
I was impressed with a conviction, that there were four English
poets whom I must have continually before me as examples—Chaucer,
Shakespeare, Spenser, and Milton. These I must study, and equal _if I
could_; and I need not think of the rest.

                    WILLIAM WORDSWORTH (1770-1850). _Memoirs._ By
                        Christopher Wordsworth, 1851, vol. ii. p.
                        470.

       *       *       *       *       *

I cannot account for Shakespeare’s low estimate of his own writings,
except from the sublimity, the superhumanity of his genius. They were
infinitely below his conception of what they might have been, and ought
to have been.

                                                          _Ibid._

       *       *       *       *       *

    . . . Matchless Shakespeare, who, undaunted, took
    From Nature’s shrinking hand her secret book,
    And page by page the wondrous tome explored.

                    D. M. MOIR (1798-1851), before 1851. “Stanzas
                        on an Infant.” _Poetical Works_, 1852,
                        vol. ii. p. 50.

       *       *       *       *       *

      Shakespeare’s glowing soul,
    Where mightiness and meekness met.

                             _Ibid._, p. 341, “Hymn to the Moon.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    Kind Shakespeare, our recording angel.

                     T. L. BEDDOES (1803-1849). “Lines written in
                         Switzerland.” _Poems_, 1851, vol. i. p.
                         215.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Kinder all earth hath grown since genial Shakespeare sung!

                     EDWARD BULWER, LORD LYTTON (1805-1873). “The
                         Souls of Books,” i. l. 21. _Works_,
                         1853, vol. iii. p. 282.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Shakespeare . . .
                            . . . Wise and true,
    Bright as the noon-tide, clear as morning dew,
    And wholesome in the spirit and the form.

                       CHARLES MACKAY (1814-1899). “Mist.” _Under
                           Green Leaves_, 1857.

       *       *       *       *       *

I care not how Shakespeare is acted: with him the thought suffices.

                          ABRAHAM LINCOLN (1809-1865), _c._ 1860.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am always happy to meet persons who perceive the transcendent
superiority of Shakespeare over all other writers.

                   R. W. EMERSON (1803-1882). “Culture.” _Conduct
                       of Life_, 1860.

       *       *       *       *       *

We may consider Shakespeare, as an ancient mythologist would have done,
as “enskied” among “the invulnerable clouds,” where no shaft, even of
envy, can assail him. From this elevation we may safely predict that he
never can be plucked.

             CARDINAL WISEMAN (1802-1856). _William Shakespeare_,
                 1865, p. 28.

       *       *       *       *       *

To say truth, what I most of all admire are the traces he shows of a
talent that could have turned the _History of England_ into a kind of
_Iliad_, almost perhaps into a kind of _Bible_.

                   THOMAS CARLYLE (1795-1881). “Shooting Niagara:
                       and After?” _Macmillan’s Magazine_,
                       August, 1867.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Shakespeare! loveliest of souls,
    Peerless in radiance, in joy.

                     MATTHEW ARNOLD (1822-1888). “Heine’s Grave.”
                         _New Poems_, 1867, p. 198.

       *       *       *       *       *

If Shakespeare did not know the ancients, I think they were at least as
unlucky in not knowing him.

                      J. R. LOWELL (1819-1891). _Among my Books_,
                          1870, p. 190.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare recognised both our human imperfections and our human
greatness. . . . A woman is dearer to Shakespeare than an angel; a man
is better than a god.

                EDWARD DOWDEN (_b._ 1843). _Shakespeare: His Mind
                    and Art_, 1875, p. 346.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare frequently has lines and passages in a strain quite false,
and which are entirely unworthy of him. But one can imagine his smiling
if one could meet him in the Elysian Fields and tell him so; smiling
and replying that he knew it perfectly well himself, and what did it
matter?

                 MATTHEW ARNOLD (1822-1888). “Preface to Poems of
                     Wordsworth,” 1879. _Essays in Criticism_,
                     2nd ser., p. 135.

       *       *       *       *       *

          All Castaly flowed crystalline
    In gentle Shakespeare’s modulated breath.

              D. G. ROSSETTI (1828-1882). “On certain Elizabethan
                  Revivals.” _Recollections of D. G. Rossetti._
                  By T. Hall Caine, 1882, p. 256.

       *       *       *       *       *

Conception, fundamental brain work, that is what makes the difference
in all art. Work your metal as much as you like, but first take care
that it is gold, and worth working. A Shakespearean sonnet is better
than the most perfect in form, because Shakespeare wrote it.

                                                 _Ibid._, p. 249.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I close your Marlowe’s page, my Shakespeare’s ope,
      How welcome—after gong and cymbal’s din—
    The continuity, the long slow slope
      And vast curves of the gradual violin!

              WILLIAM WATSON (_b._ 1858). _Epigrams of Art, Life,
                  and Nature_, 1884, vii.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare illustrates every phase and variety of humour: a complete
analysis of Shakespeare’s humour would make a system of psychology.

               G. MOULTON (_b._ 1849). _Shakespeare as a Dramatic
                   Artist_, 1893, p. 285.

       *       *       *       *       *

From Shakespeare, no doubt, the world may learn, and has learnt, much;
yet he professed so little to be a teacher, that he has often been
represented as almost without personal opinions, as a mere undisturbed
mirror, in which all Nature reflects herself. Something like a century
passed before it was perceived that his works deserved to be in a
serious sense studied.

                 J. R. SEELEY (1834-1895). _Goethe reviewed after
                     Sixty Years_, 1894, p. 98.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shakespeare and Chaucer throw off, at noble work, the lower part of
their natures as they would a rough dress.

                JOHN RUSKIN (1819-1900). _Fors Clavigera._ Letter
                    XXXIV., 1896, ii. 235.




PART III

“ROUND ABOUT”


    What’s here? A scroll; and written round about?
    Let’s see.

                                  _Titus Andronicus_, IV. ii. 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

    With his steerage shall your thoughts grow on.

                                          _Pericles_, IV. iv. 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Falstaff._ Of what quality was your love, then?

    _Ford._ Like a fair house built on another man’s ground.

                                      _Merry Wives_, II. ii. 223.




“ROUND ABOUT”


MARGARET CAVENDISH, DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE, 1664

(1624?-1674)

Remember, when we were very young maids, one day we were discoursing
about lovers, and we did enjoin each other to confess who professed to
love us, and whom we loved, and I confessed I was in love with three
dead men, which were dead long before my time, the one was Cæsar, for
his valour, the second Ovid, for his wit, and the third our countryman
Shakespeare, for his comical and tragical humour; but soon after we
both married two worthy men, and I will leave you to your own husband,
for you best know what he is. As for my husband, I know him to have
the valour of Cæsar, the fancy and wit of Ovid, and the tragical,
especially comical art of Shakespeare, in truth, he is as far beyond
Shakespeare for comical humour, as Shakespeare is beyond an ordinary
poet in that way.

              Letter CLXII. _CCXI Sociable Letters written by the
                  Lady Marchioness of Newcastle_, 1664. Letters
                  CXXIII. and CLXII.


JOSEPH ADDISON, 1711

(1672-1719)

Some years ago I was at the tragedy of “Macbeth,” and unfortunately
placed myself under a woman of quality, that is since dead; who, as I
found by the noise she made, was newly returned from France. A little
before the rising of the curtain, she broke out into a loud soliloquy,
“When will the dear witches enter?” and immediately upon their first
appearance, asked a lady that sat three boxes from her, on her right
hand, if those witches were not charming creatures. A little later, as
Betterton was in one of the finest speeches of the play, she shook her
fan at another lady, who sat as far on her left hand, and told her in
a whisper that might be heard all over the pit, “We must not expect to
see Balloon to-night.” Not long after, calling out to a young baronet
by his name, who sat three seats before me, she asked him whether
Macbeth’s wife was still alive; and before he could give an answer,
fell a-talking of the ghost of Banquo. She had by this time formed a
little audience to herself, and fixed the attention of all about her.
But as I had a mind to hear the play, I got out of the sphere of her
impertinence, and planted myself in one of the remotest corners of the
pit.

                          _The Spectator_, No. 45, 21 April 1711.


HENRY FIELDING, 1743

(1707-1754)

I then observed Shakespeare standing between Betterton and Booth, and
deciding a difference between these two great actors concerning the
placing an accent in one of his lines: this was disputed on both sides
with a warmth which surprised me in Elysium, till I discovered by
intuition that every soul retained its principal characteristic, being,
indeed, its very essence. The line was that celebrated one in _Othello_—

    Put out the light, and then put out the light,

according to Betterton. Mr. Booth contended to have it thus:—

    Put out the light, and then put out _the_ light.

I could not help offering my conjecture on this occasion, and suggested
it might perhaps be—

    Put out the light, and then put out _thy_ light.

Another hinted a reading very sophisticated in my opinion—

    Put out the light, and then put out _thee_, light.

Making light to be the vocative case. Another would have altered the
last word, and read—

    Put out thy light, and then put out thy _sight_.

But Betterton said, if the text was to be disturbed, he saw no reason
why a word might not be changed as well as a letter, and instead of
“put out thy light,” you may read “put out thy eyes.” At last it was
agreed on all sides to refer the matter to the decision of Shakespeare
himself, who delivered his sentiments as follows: “Faith, gentlemen,
it is so long since I wrote the line, I have forgot my meaning. This I
know, could I have dreamt so much nonsense would have been talked and
writ about it, I would have blotted it out of my works; for I am sure,
if any of these be my meaning, it doth me very little honour.”

He was then interrogated concerning some other ambiguous passages
in his works; but he declined any satisfactory answer; saying, if
Mr. Theobald had not writ about it sufficiently, there were three or
four more new editions of his plays coming out, which he hoped would
satisfy every one: concluding, “I marvel nothing so much as that men
will gird themselves at discovering obscure beauties in an author.
Certes the greatest and most pregnant beauties are ever the plainest
and most evidently striking; and when two meanings of a passage can in
the least balance our judgments which to prefer, I hold it matter of
unquestionable certainty that neither of them is worth a farthing.”

From his works our conversation turned on his monument; upon which
Shakespeare, shaking his sides, and addressing himself to Milton, cried
out, “On my word, brother Milton, they have brought a noble set of
poets together; they would have been hanged erst have convened such a
company at their tables when alive.” “True, brother,” answered Milton,
“unless we had been as incapable of eating then as we are now.”

                         “A Journey from this World to the Next,”
                             Chapter viii. _Miscellanies_, 1743.


THOMAS EDWARDS, 1747

(1699-1757)

CANON I. A Professed Critic has a right to declare that his Author
wrote whatever He thinks he ought to have written, with as much
positiveness as if he had been at his elbow.

CANON II. He has a right to alter any passage which He does not
understand.

CANON III. These alterations He may make in spite of the exactness of
measure.

CANON IV. Where He does not like an expression, and yet cannot mend it,
He may abuse his Author for it.

CANON V. Or He may condemn it as a foolish interpolation.

CANON VI. As every Author is to be corrected into all possible
perfection, the Professed Critic is the sole judge; He may alter any
word or phrase, which does not want amendment, or which _will do_,
provided He can think of anything which He imagines _will do better_.

CANON VII. He may find out obsolete words, or coin new ones, and put
them in the place of such as He does not like, or does not understand.

CANON VIII. He may prove a reading or support an explanation by any
sort of reasons, no matter whether good or bad.

CANON IX. He may interpret his Author so as to make him mean directly
contrary to what he says.

CANON X. He should not allow any poetical licences, which He does not
understand.

CANON XI. He may make foolish amendments or explanations, and refute
them, only to enhance the value of his critical skill.

CANON XII. He may find out a bawdy or immoral meaning in his Author
where there does not appear to be any hint that way.

CANON XIII. He need not attend to the low accuracy of orthography, or
pointing; but may ridicule such trivial criticisms in others.

CANON XIV. Yet, when He pleases to condescend to such work, He may
value himself upon it; and not only restore lost puns, but point out
such quaintnesses where, perhaps, the Author never thought of them.

CANON XV. He may explain a difficult passage by words absolutely
unintelligible.

CANON XVI. He may contradict himself for the sake of showing his
critical skill on both sides of the question.

CANON XVII. It will be necessary for the Professed Critic to have by
him a good number of pedantic and abusive expressions, to throw about
upon proper occasions.

CANON XVIII. He may explain his Author, or any former Editor of him, by
supplying such words, or pieces of words, or marks, as He thinks fit
for that purpose.

CANON XIX. He may use the very same reasons for confirming his own
observations, which he has disallowed in his adversary.

CANON XX. As the design of writing notes is not so much to explain
the Author’s meaning as to display the Critic’s knowledge, it may be
proper, to show his universal learning, that He minutely point out from
whence every metaphor and allusion is taken.

CANON XXI. It will be proper, in order to show his wit, especially if
the Critic be a married man, to take every opportunity of sneering at
the fair sex.

CANON XXII. He may mis-quote himself, or anybody else, in order to make
an occasion of writing notes, when he cannot otherwise find one.

CANON XXIII. The Professed Critic, in order to furnish his quota to the
bookseller, may write notes of nothing; that is to say, notes which
either explain things which do not want explanation, or such as do not
explain matters at all, but merely fill up so much paper.

CANON XXIV. He may dispense with truth, in order to give the world a
higher idea of his parts, or the value of his work.

                  _The Canons of Criticism_, first published as a
                      _Supplement to Mr. Warburton’s Edition of
                      Shakespear. Collected from Notes in that
                      Celebrated Work, and proper to be bound up
                      with it._ By the OTHER GENTLEMAN of
                      _Lincoln’s_ Inn.

    Warburton’s edition also elicited _An Attempte to Rescue that
    Auncient English Poet and Play-Wrighte, Maister Willaume
    Shakespere, from the many Errores faulsely charged on him
    by Certaine New-fangled Wittes, by a Gentleman formerly of
    Greys-Inn_. 1749. This small treatise dealt with _The Tempest_
    in a spirit of genuine zeal, but with less controversial
    ability than was displayed by the “Other Gentleman.”


MARK AKENSIDE, 1749

(1721-1770)

“_The Remonstrance of Shakespeare: supposed to have been spoken at the
Theatre Royal, while the French comedians were acting by subscription._
1749.”

    If, yet regardful of your native land,
    Old Shakespeare’s tongue you deign to understand,
    Lo, from the blissful bowers where Heaven rewards
    Instructive sages and unblemish’d bards,
    I come, the ancient founder of the stage,
    Intent to learn, in this discerning age,
    What form of wit your fancies have embrac’d,
    And whither tends your elegance of taste,
    That thus at length our homely toils you spurn,
    That thus to foreign scenes you proudly turn,
    That from my brow the laurel wreath you claim
    To crown the rivals of your country’s fame.
      What though the footsteps of my devious Muse
    The measur’d walks of Grecian art refuse?
    Or though the frankness of my hardy style
    Mock the nice touches of the critic’s file?
    Yet, what my age and climate held to view,
    Impartial I survey’d, and fearless drew.
    And say, ye skilful in the human heart,
    Who know to prize a poet’s noblest part,
    What age, what clime, could e’er an ampler field
    For lofty thought, for daring fancy, yield?
    I saw this England break the shameful bands
    Forg’d for the souls of men by sacred hands:
    I saw each groaning realm her aid implore;
    Her sons the heroes of each warlike shore;
    Her naval standard (the dire Spaniard’s bane)
    Obey’d through all the circuit of the main.
    Then too great Commerce, for a late-found world,
    Against your coast her eager sails unfurl’d:
    New hopes, new passions, thence to bosom fir’d;
    New plans, new arts, the genius thence inspir’d;
    Thence every scene, which private fortune knows,
    In stronger life, with bolder spirit, rose.
      Disgrac’d I this full prospect which I drew?
    My colours languid, or my strokes untrue?
    Have not your sages, warriors, swains, and kings
    Confess’d the living draught of men and things?
    What other bard in any clime appears
    Alike the master of your smiles and tears?
    Yet have I deigned your audience to entice
    With wretched bribes to luxury and vice?
    Or have my various scenes a purpose known
    Which freedom, virtue, glory, might not own?
      Such from the first was my dramatic plan,
    It should be yours to crown what I began:
    And now that England spurns her Gothic chain,
    And equal laws and social science reign,
    I thought, Now surely shall my zealous eyes
    View nobler bards and juster critics rise,
    Intent with learned labour to refine
    The copious ore of Albion’s native mine,
    Our stately Muse more graceful airs to teach,
    And form her tongue to more attractive speech,
    Till rival nations listen at her feet,
    And own her polish’d as they own’d her great.
      But do you thus my favourite hopes fulfil?
    Is France at last the standard of your skill?
    Alas for you! that so betray a mind
    Of art unconscious and to beauty blind.
    Say; does her language your ambition raise,
    Her barren, trivial, unharmonious phrase,
    Which fetters eloquence to scantiest bounds,
    And maims the cadence of poetic sounds?
    Say; does your humble admiration choose
    The gentle prattle of her Comic Muse,
    While wits, plain-dealers, fops, and fools appear,
    Charg’d to say nought but what the king may hear?
    Or rather melt your sympathising hearts,
    Won by her tragic scene’s romantic arts,
    Where old and young declaim on soft desire,
    And heroes never, but for love, expire?
      No. Though the charms of novelty, awhile,
    Perhaps too fondly win your thoughtless smile,
    Yet not for you design’d indulgent fate
    The modes or manners of the Bourbon state.
    And ill your minds my partial judgment reads,
    And many an augury my soul misleads,
    If the fair maids of yonder blooming train
    To their light courtship would an audience deign,
    Or those chaste matrons a Parisian wife
    Choose for the model of domestic life;
    Or if one youth of all that generous band,
    The strength and splendour of their native land,
    Would yield his portion of his country’s fame,
    And quit old freedom’s patrimonial claim,
    With lying smiles oppressions pomp to see,
    And judge of glory by a king’s decree.
      O blest at home with justly-envied laws,
    O long the chiefs of Europe’s general cause,
    Whom Heaven hath chosen at each dangerous hour
    To check the inroads of barbaric power,
    The rights of trampled nations to reclaim,
    And guard the social world from bonds and shame;
    Oh, let not luxury’s fantastic charms
    Thus give the lie to your heroic arms:
    Nor for the ornaments of life embrace
    Dishonest lessons from that vaunting race,
    Whom fate’s dread laws (for, in eternal fate
    Despotic rule was heir to freedom’s hate,)
    Whom in each warlike, each commercial part,
    In civil counsel, and in pleasing art,
    The judge of earth predestin’d for your foes,
    And made it fame and virtue to oppose.

                     _Odes on Several Subjects._ Book II., ode i.
                         _Poetical Works._ Aldine edition, 1835,
                         p. 199.


ROBERT LLOYD, 1751

(1733-1764)

    There stood an ancient mount, yclept Parnass,
      (The fair domain of sacred poesy,)
    Which, with fresh odours ever-blooming, was
      Besprinkled with the dew of Castaly;
    Which now in soothing murmurs whisp’ring glides
      Wat’ring with genial waves the fragrant soil,
    Now rolls adown the mountain’s steepy sides,
      Teaching the vales full beauteously to smile,
      Dame Nature’s handiwork, not form’d by lab’ring toil.

    The Muses fair, these peaceful shades among,
      With skilful fingers sweep the trembling strings;
    The air in silence listens to the song,
      And Time forgets to ply his lazy wings;
    Pale-visag’d Care, with foul unhallow’d feet,
      Attempts the summit of the hill to gain,
    Ne can the hag arrive the blissful seat,
      Her unavailing strength is spent in vain,
      Content sits on the top, and mocks her empty pain.

    Oft Phœbus’ self left his divine abode,
      And here enshrouded in a shady bow’r,
    Regardless of his state, laid by the god,
      And own’d sweet music’s more alluring pow’r.
    On either side was plac’d a peerless wight,
      Whose merit long had fill’d the trump of Fame;
    This, Fancy’s darling child, was Spenser hight,
      Who pip’d full pleasing on the banks of Tame;
      That, no less fam’d than he, and Milton was his name.

      .       .       .       .       .       .       .

    Next Shakespeare sat, irregularly great,
      And in his hand a magic rod did hold,
    Which visionary beings did create,
      And burn the foulest dross to purest gold:
    Whatever spirits rose in earth or air,
      Or bad or good, obey his dread command;
    To his behests these willingly repair,
      Those aw’d by terrors of his magic wand,
      The which not all their pow’rs united might withstand.

    Beside the bard there stood a beauteous maid,
      Whose glittering appearance dimm’d the eyen;
    Her thin-wrought vesture various tints display’d,
      Fancy her name, ysprong of race divine;
    Her mantle wimpled low, her silken hair,
      Which loose adown her well-turn’d shoulders stray’d,
    She made a net to catch the wanton air,
      Whose love-sick breezes all around her play’d,
      And seem’d in whispers soft to court the heav’nly maid.

    And ever and anon she wav’d in air
      A sceptre, fraught with all-creative pow’r:
    She wav’d it round: eftsoons there did appear
      Spirits and witches, forms unknown before:
    Again she lifts her wonder-working wand;
      Eftsoons upon the flow’ry plain were seen
    The gay inhabitants of Fairy-Land,
      And blithe attendants upon Mab their queen
      In mystic circles danc’d along th’ enchanted green.

    On th’ other side stood Nature, goddess fair;
      A matron seem’d she, and of manners staid;
    Beauteous her form, majestic was her air,
      In loose attire of purest white array’d:
    A potent rod she bore, whose pow’r was such
      (As from her darling’s works may well be shown,)
    That often with its soul-enchanting touch,
      She rais’d or joy or caus’d the deep-felt groan,
      And each man’s passions made subservient to her own.

              _The Progress of Envy_, 1751, Stanzas 2-4 and 7-10.


OLIVER GOLDSMITH, 1765

(1728-1774)

The character of old Falstaff, even with all his faults, gives me more
consolation than the most studied efforts of wisdom: I here behold an
agreeable old fellow, forgetting age, and showing me the way to be
young at sixty-five. Sure I am well able to be as merry, though not so
comical, as he. Is it not in my power to have, though not so much wit,
at least as much vivacity?—Age, care, wisdom, reflection, begone!—I
give you to the winds. Let’s have t’other bottle: here’s to the memory
of Shakespeare, Falstaff, and all the merry men of Eastcheap.

Such were the reflections that naturally arose while I sat at the
Boar’s-head tavern, still kept at Eastcheap. Here, by a pleasant fire,
in the very room where old Sir John Falstaff cracked his jokes, in the
very chair which was sometimes honoured by Prince Henry, and sometimes
polluted by his immoral merry companions, I sat and ruminated on the
follies of youth; wished to be young again; but was resolved to make
the best of life while it lasted, and now and then compared past and
present times together.

              “A Reverie at the Boar’s Head Tavern in Eastcheap.”
                  _Collected Essays_, 1765.


GEORGE, LORD LYTTELTON, 1765

(1709-1773)

“_Boileau—Pope._”

BOILEAU

. . . The office of an _editor_ was below you, and your mind was unfit
for the drudgery it requires. Would anybody think of employing a
Raphael to clean an old picture?

POPE

The principal cause of my undertaking that task was zeal for the honour
of Shakespeare: and if you knew all his beauties as well as I, you
would not wonder at this zeal. No other author had ever so copious,
so bold, so _creative_ an imagination, with so perfect a knowledge of
the passions, the humours, and sentiments of mankind. He painted all
characters, from kings down to peasants, with equal truth and equal
force. If human nature were destroyed, and no monument were left of it
except his works, other beings might know _what man was_ from those
writings.

BOILEAU

You say he painted all characters, from kings down to peasants, with
equal truth and equal force. I cannot deny that he did so; but I wish
he had not jumbled those characters together, in the composition of his
pictures, as he has frequently done.

POPE

The strange mixture of tragedy, comedy, and farce in the same
play, nay, sometimes in the same scene, I acknowledge to be quite
inexcusable. But this was the taste of the times when Shakespeare wrote.

BOILEAU

A great genius ought to guide, not servilely follow, the taste of his
contemporaries.

POPE

Consider from how thick a darkness of barbarism the genius of
Shakespeare broke forth! What were the English, and what (let me
ask you) were the French dramatic performances, in the age when he
flourished? The advances he made towards the highest perfection both of
tragedy and comedy are amazing! In the principal points, in the power
of exciting terror and pity, or raising laughter in an audience, none
yet has excelled him, and very few have equalled.

BOILEAU

Do you think he was equal in comedy to Moliere?

POPE

In _comic force_ I do: but in the fine and delicate strokes of satire,
and what is called _genteel comedy_, he was greatly inferior to
that admirable writer. There is nothing in him to compare with the
_Misanthrope_, the _Ecole des Femmes_, or _Tartuffe_.

BOILEAU

This, Mr. Pope, is a great deal for an Englishman to acknowledge.
A veneration for Shakespeare seems to be a part of your national
religion, and the only part in which even your men of sense are
fanatics.

POPE

He who can read Shakespeare, and be cool enough for all the accuracy of
sober criticism, has more of reason than taste.

BOILEAU

I join with you in admiring him as a prodigy of genius, though I find
the most shocking absurdities in his plays; absurdities which no critic
of my nation can pardon.

POPE

We will be satisfied with your feeling the excellence of his beauties.

                _Dialogues of the Dead_, xiv., 4th edition, 1765.
                    XIV. _Boileau—Pope_, pp. 125-128.

    Three editions of _Dialogues of the Dead_ were published
    in 1760. Practically the whole of the passage quoted above
    appeared for the first time in the fourth edition in 1765.


LAURENCE STERNE, 1768

(1713-1768)

“_The Passport—Versailles._”

I could not conceive why the Count de B * * * had gone so abruptly
out of the room, any more than I could conceive why he had put the
Shakespeare into his pocket—_Mysteries which must explain themselves,
are not worth the loss of time which a conjecture about them takes
up_: it was better to read Shakespeare; so, taking up _Much Ado about
Nothing_, I transported myself instantly from the chair I sat in to
Messina in Sicily, and got so busy with Don Pedro and Benedick and
Beatrice, that I thought not of Versailles, the Count, or the Passport.

Sweet pliability of man’s spirit, that can at once surrender itself
to illusions, which cheat expectation and sorrow of their wearied
moments!—long, long since had you numbered out my days, had I not trod
so great a part of them upon this enchanted ground: when my way is too
rough for my feet, or too steep for my strength, I get off it, to some
smooth velvet path which fancy has scattered over with rosebuds of
delights; and, having taken a few turns in it, come back strengthened
and refreshed—When evils press sore upon me, and there is no retreat
from them in this world, then I take a new course—I leave it—and as I
have a clearer idea of the Elysian fields than I have of heaven, I
force myself, like Æneas, into them—I see him meet the pensive shade
of his forsaken Dido—and wish to recognise it—I see the injured spirit
wave her head, and turn off silent from the author of her miseries
and dishonours—I lose the feelings for myself in hers—and in those
affections which were wont to make me mourn for her when I was at
school.

_Surely this is not walking in a vain shadow—nor does man disquiet
himself_ in vain _by it_—he oftener does so in trusting the issue of
his commotions to reason only—I can safely say for myself, I was never
able to conquer any one single bad sensation in my heart so decisively,
as by beating up as fast as I could some kindly and gentle sensation,
to fight it upon its own ground.

When I had got to the end of the third act, the Count de B * * *
entered with my passport in his hand. M. Le Duc de C * * *, said the
Count, is as good a prophet, I dare say, as he is a statesman—_Un homme
qui rit_, said the Duke, _ne sera jamais dangereux_. Had it been for
any one but the King’s jester, added the Count, I could not have got
it these two hours—_Pardonnez moi_, M. Le Compte, said I—I am not the
King’s jester—But you are Yorick?—Yes—_Et vous plaisantez?_—I answered,
Indeed I did jest—but was not paid for it—it was entirely at my own
expense.

We have no jester at court, M. Le Compte, said I—the last we had was
in the licentious reign of Charles II.—since which time our
manners have been so gradually refining, that our court at present is
so full of patriots, who wish for _nothing_ but the honours and wealth
of their country—and our ladies are all so chaste, so spotless, so
good, so devout—there is nothing for a jester to make a jest of—

_Voila un persiflage!_ cried the Count.

                 _Yorick’s Sentimental Journey through France and
                     Italy_, etc., 1768, vol. ii.


ANONYMOUS, 1769

“_The Dramatic Race. A Catch. By a Lover of the Turf._”

    Clear, clear the course—make room—make room, I say!
    Now they are off, and _Jonson_ makes the play.
    I’ll bet the odds—done, sir, with you, and you;
    SHAKESPEARE keeps near him—and he’ll win it too:
    Here’s even money—done for a hundred, done—
    Now, _Jonson!_ now or never—he has won.
    I’ll take my oath, that SHAKESPEARE won the prize,—
    Damme! whoever says he lost it, lies.

                _Shakespeare’s Garland. Being a Collection of New
                    Songs, Ballads, Roundelays, Catches, Glees,
                    Comic Serenatas, etc., performed at the
                    Jubilee at Stratford-upon-Avon_, 1769, p. 16.


ISAAC BICKERSTAFF, 1769

(_d._ 1812?)

“_Queen Mab. A Cantata._”

RECITATIVE

    Not long ago, ’tis said, a proclamation
    Was sent abroad through all the Fairy nation;
    Mab to her loving subjects—A decree,
    At Shakespeare’s tomb to hold a Jubilee.

ACCOMPANIED

    The night was come, and now on Avon’s side
        The pigmy race was seen,
        Attended by their queen,
    On chafers some, and some on crickets ride.
        The queen appear’d from far,
        Mounted in a nut-shell car;
    Six painted lady-birds the carriage drew:
        And now the cavalcade,
        In order due array’d,
            March’d first
            Where erst
        The sacred Mulb’ry grew,
        And there their homage paid.
        Next they sought the holy ground,
            And while
    A thousand glow-worm torches glimmer’d round;
    Thus Good Fellow, the herald of his fame,
    Did from the alabaster height proclaim
        The poet’s titles and his style.

AIR

    SHAKESPEARE, heaven’s most favour’d creature,
    Truest copier of Nature,
        First of the Parnassian train;
    Chiefest fav’rite of the Muses,
    Which soe’er the poet chooses,
        Blest alike in ev’ry strain.
    Life’s great censor, and inspector,
    Fancy’s treasurer, wit’s director,
        Artless, to the shame of art;
    Master of the various passions,
    Leader of all inclinations,
        Sov’reign of the human heart.

RECITATIVE

    Then did the queen an acorn take,
      Fill’d with morn and ev’ning dew,
    Brush’d from ev’ry fragrant brake
      That round the lawns of Stratford grew.

ACCOMPANIED

    “And thus,” said she, “libation do I make
      To our friend and father’s shade:
      ’Twas Shakespeare that the Fairies made;
    And men shall give us honour for his sake.”

AIR

    O happy bard, whose potent skill
    Can give existence where it will!
    Let giant wisdom strive to chase
    From man’s belief the Fairy race;
    Religion stern our pow’r reject,
    Philosophy our tales neglect,
      Only trusting what ’tis seeing;
    Combat us howe’er they list,
    In thy scenes we shall exist,
      Sure as if Nature gave us being.

                _Shakespeare’s Garland. Being a Collection of New
                    Songs, Ballads, Roundelays, Catches, Glees,
                    Comic Serenatas, etc., performed at the
                    Jubilee at Stratford-upon-Avon_, 1769, p. 21.

    This piece was set to music by Dibdin.


ANONYMOUS, 1778

“_Shakespeare’s Bedside, or his Doctors enumerated._”

    Old Shakespeare was sick;—for a doctor he sent;—
      But ’twas long before any one came:
    Yet at length his assistance Nic Rowe did present,
      Sure all men have heard of his name.

    As he found that the Poet had tumbled his bed,
      He smooth’d it as well as he could;
    He gave him an anodyne, comb’d out his head,
      But did his complaint little good.

    Doctor Pope to incision at once did proceed,
      And the Bard for the simples he cut;
    For his regular practice was always to bleed,
      Ere the fees in his pocket he put.

    Next Theobald advanc’d, who at best was a quack,
      And dealt but in old women’s stuff;
    Yet he caus’d the Physician of Twick’nam to pack,
      And the patient grew cheerful enough.

    Next Hanmer, who fees ne’er descended to crave,
      In gloves lily-white did advance;
    To the Poet the gentlest of purges he gave,
      And, for exercise, taught him to dance.

    One Warburton then, though allied to the Church,
      Produc’d his alternative stores;
    But his med’cines the case so oft left in the lurch,
      That Edwards kick’d him out of doors.

    Next Johnson arriv’d to the patient’s relief,
      And ten years he had him in hand;
    But, tir’d of his task, ’tis the general belief,
      He left him before he could stand.

    Now Capell drew near,—not a Quaker more prim,—
      And numbered each hair on his pate;
    By styptics, call’d stops, he contracted each limb,
      And crippled for ever his gait.

    From Gopsall then strutted a formal old goose,
      And he’d cure him by inches, he swore;
    But when the poor Poet had taken one dose,
      He vow’d he would swallow no more.

    But Johnson, determin’d to save him, or kill,
      A second prescription display’d;
    And, that none might find fault with his drop or his pill,
      Fresh doctors he call’d to his aid.

    First Steevens came loaded with black-letter books,
      Of fame more desirous than pelf;
    Such reading, observers might read in his looks,
      As no one e’er read but himself.

    Then Warner, by Plautus and Glossary known,
      And Hawkins, historian of sound;
    Then Warton and Collins together came on,
      For Greek and Potatoes renown’d.

    With songs on his pontificalibus pinn’d,
      Next Percy the great did appear;
    And Farmer, who twice in a pamphlet had sinn’d,
      Brought up his empirical rear.

    “The cooks the more numerous, the worse is the broth,”
      Says a proverb I well can believe;
    And yet to condemn them untried I am loth,
      So at present shall laugh in my sleeve.

                _Gentleman’s Magazine_, 1787, vol. lvii. ii. 912.
                    _Muses’ Mirror_, 1778, i. 90.

    “Edwards,”—the author of _Canons of Criticism_, see p. 281.

    “Capell ... numbered each hair on his pate,”—Edward Capell (see
    p. 107), of whom Dr. Johnson remarked that his abilities “were
    just sufficient to enable him to select the black hairs from
    the white for the use of periwig makers.” He gave most of his
    attention to the production of an accurate text, based on a
    careful collation of the old copies, and he did his work very
    thoroughly.

    “From Gopsall ... a formal old goose,”—Charles Jennens
    (1700-1773), who printed some of Shakespeare’s tragedies,
    and brought upon himself the unmerciful ridicule of George
    Steevens. He lived at Gopsall in Leicestershire.

    “Warner,”—Richard Warner (1713?-1775), the botanist and
    classical scholar. He made extensive collections for an edition
    and for a glossary of Shakespeare. Neither was published.

    “Hawkins,”—Sir John Hawkins (1719-1789), who published _The
    General History of the Science and Practice of Music_, 1776.

    “Warton and Collins,”—Joseph Warton (1722-1800) and William
    Collins (1721-1759) were school-fellows at Winchester, and
    life-long friends.

    “Percy,”—Bishop Percy of _Percy’s Reliques_.

    “Farmer,”—Richard Farmer (1735-1797), author of the _Essay on
    the Learning of Shakespeare_, 1767.


HORACE WALPOLE, EARL OF ORFORD, 1788

(1717-1797)

My histrionic acquaintance spreads. I supped at Lady Dorothy Hotham’s
with Mrs. Siddons, have visited and been visited by her, and have
seen and liked her much, yes, very much, in the passionate scenes in
“Percy”; but I do not admire her in cool declamation, and find her
voice very hollow and defective. I asked her in which part she would
most wish me to see her? She named Portia in the “Merchant of Venice”;
but I begged to be excused. With all my enthusiasm for Shakespeare, it
is one of his plays that I like the least. The story of the caskets is
silly, and, except the character of Shylock, I see nothing beyond the
attainment of a mortal; Euripides, or Racine, or Voltaire might have
written all the rest.

                  Letter to the Countess of Ossory, 15 Jan. 1788.
                      _Letters_, ed. Peter Cunningham, 1859, vol.
                      ix. p. 124.


PAUL WHITEHEAD, 1790

(1710-1774)

    While here to Shakespeare Garrick pays
    His tributary thanks and praise;
    Invokes the animated stone,
    To make the poet’s mind his own;
    That he each character may trace
    With humour, dignity, and grace;
    And mark, unerring mark, to men,
    The rich creation of his pen:
    Preferr’d the prayer—the marble god
    Methinks I see, assenting, nod,
    And, pointing to his laurell’d brow,
    Cry—“Half this wreath to you I owe:
    Lost to the stage, and lost to fame;
    Murder’d my scenes, scarce known my name;
    Sunk in oblivion and disgrace
    Among the common scribbling race,
    Unnotic’d long thy Shakespeare lay,
    To dulness and to time a prey:
    But now I rise, I breathe, I live
    In you—my representative!
    Again the hero’s breast I fire,
    Again the tender sigh inspire;
    Each side, again, with laughter shake,
    And teach the villain-heart to quake;
    All this, my son! again I do—
    I?—No, my son!—’Tis I, and you.”
      While thus the grateful statue speaks,
    A blush o’erspreads the suppliant’s cheeks—
      “What!—Half this wreath, wit’s mighty chief?—
    O grant,” he cries, “one single leaf;
    That far o’erpays his humble merit,
    Who’s but the organ of thy spirit.”
      Phoebus the generous contest heard—
    When thus the god address’d the bard:
    “Here, take this laurel from my brow,
    On him your mortal wreath bestow;—
    Each matchless, each the palm shall bear,
    In heav’n the bard, on earth the play’r.”

                       “Verses dropped in Mr. Garrick’s Temple of
                           Shakespeare.” _Poems and Miscellaneous
                           Compositions_, 1790.

    Garrick had in his garden at Hampton a temple dedicated to
    Shakespeare, containing a statue of the poet by Roubiliac.


WILLIAM COMBE, 1812

(1741-1823)

“_Dr. Syntax in the Pit of Covent Garden Theatre._”

CRITIC.—

    “Oh, what a _Falstaff_! Oh, how fine!
    Oh, ’tis great acting—’tis divine!”

SYNTAX.—

    “His acting’s great—that I can tell ye;
    For all the acting’s in his belly.”

CRITIC.—

    “But, with due def’rence to your joke,
    A truer word I never spoke
    Than when I say—you’ve never been
    The witness of a finer scene.
    Th’ admir’d actor whom you see
    Plays the fat knight most charmingly:
    ’Tis in this part he doth excel;
    _Quin_ never played it half so well.”

SYNTAX.—

    “You ne’er saw Quin the stage adorn:
    He acted ere your sire was born,
    And critics, sir, who liv’d before you,
    Would have disclos’d a different story.
    This play I’ve better acted seen
    In country towns where I have been.
    I do not hesitate to say—
    I’d rather read this very play
    By my own parlour fireside,
    With my poor judgment for my guide,
    Than see the actors of this stage,
    Who make me gape at Shakespeare’s page.
    When I read Falstaff to myself,
    I laugh like any merry elf;
    While my mind feels a cheering glow
    That Shakespeare only can bestow.
    The swaggering words in his defence,
    Which scarce are wit and yet are sense;
    The ribald jest—the quick conceit—
    The boast of many a braggart feat;
    The half-grave questions and replies
    In his high-wrought soliloquies;
    The dubious thought—the pleasant prate,
    Which give no time to love or hate,
    In such succession do they flow,
    From no to yea—from yea to no,
    Have not been to my mind convey’d
    By this pretender to his trade.
    The smile sarcastic, and the leer
    That tells the laughing mock’ry near;
    The warning look, that ere ’tis spoke
    Aptly forbodes the coming joke;
    The air so solemn, yet so sly,
    Shap’d to conceal the ready lie;
    The eyes, with some shrewd meaning bright,
    I surely have not seen to-night:
    Again, I must beg leave to tell ye,
    ’Tis nought of Falstaff but his belly.”

CRITIC.—

    “All this is fine—and may be true;
    But with such truths I’ve nought to do.
    I’m sure, sir, I shall say aright,
    When I report the great delight
    Th’ enraptur’d audience feel to-night;
    It is indeed, with no small sorrow,
    I cannot your opinions borrow
    To fill the columns of to-morrow.
    My light critique will be preferr’d,
    The public always takes my word;
    Nay, the loud plaudits heard around
    Must all your far-fetch’d thoughts confound:
    I truly wonder when I see
    You do not laugh as well as me.”

SYNTAX.—

    “My muscles other ways are drawn:
    I cannot laugh, sir,—while I yawn.”

CRITIC.—

    “But you will own the scenes are fine?”

SYNTAX.—

    “Whate’er the acting, they’re divine,
    And fit for any pantomime.
    Of this it is that I complain;
    These are the tricks which I disdain:
    The painter’s art the play commends;
    On gaudy show success depends:
    The clothes are made in just design;
    They are well character’d and fine.
    The actors now, I think, Heav’n bless ’em,
    Must learn their art from those who dress ’em;
    But give me actors, give me plays,
    On which I could with rapture gaze,
    Tho’ coats and scenes were made of baise:
    For if the scene were highly wrought;
    If actors acted as they ought;
    You would not then be pleased to see
    This heavy mass of frippery.
    Hear Horace, sir, who wrote of plays
    In Ancient Rome’s Augustan days:—
    ‘_Tanto cum strepitu ludi spectantur, et artes,
    Divitiæque peregrinæ: quibus oblitus actor
    Cum stetit in scena, concurrit dextera lævæ.
    Dixit adhuc aliquid? Nil sane. Quid placet ergo?
    Lana Tarentino violas imitata veneno._’”

CRITIC.—

    “Your pardon, sir, but all around me
    There are such noises they confound me:
    And though I full attention paid,
    I scarcely know a word you said.
    To say the truth, I must acknowledge
    ’Tis long since I have quitted college:
    Virgil and Horace are my friends,
    I have them at my fingers’ ends.
    But Grecian lore, I blush to own,
    Is wholly to my mind unknown.
    I therefore must your meaning seek:
    Oblige me, sir, translate your Greek.
    But see, the farce is now begun,
    And you must listen to the fun,
    It sure has robb’d you of your bile;
    For now, methinks, you deign to smile.”

SYNTAX.—

    “The thing is droll, and aptly bent
    To raise a vulgar merriment:
    But Merry-Andrews, seen as such,
    Have often made me laugh as much.
    An actor does but play the fool
    When he forsakes old Shakespeare’s rule,
    And lets his own foul nonsense out,
    To please th’ ill-judging rabble rout:
    But when he _swears_, to furnish laughter,
    The beadle’s whip should follow after.”

           _The Tour of Dr. Syntax in search of the Picturesque._
               1812, Canto XXIV. ll. 173 _sq._

    _Tanto cum strepitu_, etc., Horace, _Epistles_, II. i.
    203-7.


CHARLES LAMB, 1826.

(1775-1834)

Your fair critic in the coach reminds me of a Scotchman who assured me
that he did not see much in Shakespeare. I replied, I dare say _not_.
He felt the equivoke, lookd awkward, and reddish, but soon returnd to
the attack, by saying that he thought Burns was as good as Shakespeare:
I said that I had no doubt he was—to a _Scotchman_. We exchangd no more
words that day.

                 Letter to J. B. Dibdin, June 30, 1826. _Works of
                     Charles and Mary Lamb._ Ed. E. V. Lucas.
                     1903-4. Vol. vii.


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE, 1845

(1804-1864)

The human race had now reached a stage of progress so far beyond what
the wisest and wittiest men of former ages had ever dreamed of, that
it would have been a manifest absurdity to allow the earth to be any
longer encumbered with their poor achievements in the literary line.
Accordingly, a thorough and searching investigation had swept the
booksellers’ shops, hawkers’ stands, public and private libraries, and
even the little bookshelf by the country fireside, and had brought the
world’s entire mass of printed paper, bound or in sheets, to swell
the already mountain-bulk of our illustrious bonfire. Thick, heavy
folios, containing the labours of lexicographers, commentators, and
encyclopedists, were flung in, and, falling among the embers with a
leaden thump, smouldered away to ashes, like rotten wood. The small,
richly-gilt French tomes of the last age, with the hundred volumes of
Voltaire among them, went off in a brilliant shower of sparkles, and
little jets of flame; while the current literature of the same nation
burnt red and blue, and threw an infernal light over the visages of
the spectators, converting them all to the aspect of parti-coloured
fiends. A collection of German stories emitted a scent of brimstone.
The English standard authors made excellent fuel, generally exhibiting
the properties of sound oak logs. Milton’s works, in particular, sent
up a powerful blaze, gradually reddening into a coal, which promised
to endure longer than almost any other material of the pile. From
Shakespeare there gushed a flame of such marvellous splendour, that men
shaded their eyes as against the sun’s meridian glory; nor even when
the works of his own elucidators were flung upon him, did he cease to
flash forth a dazzling radiance beneath the ponderous heap. It is my
belief that he is still blazing as fervidly as ever.

“Could a poet but light a lamp at that glorious flame,” remarked I, “he
might then consume the midnight oil to some good purpose.”

“That is the very thing which modern poets have been too apt to do,
or at least to attempt,” answered a critic. “The chief benefit to be
expected from this conflagration of past literature undoubtedly is,
that writers will henceforth be compelled to light their lamps at the
sun or stars.”

                 _Mosses from an Old Manse_: “Earth’s Holocaust,”
                     ii. 146-7.


WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, 1846

(1775-1864)

“_Shakespeare and Bacon._”

SOUTHEY.—In so wide and untrodden a creation as that of
Shakespeare’s, can we wonder or complain that sometimes we are
bewildered and entangled in the exuberance of fertility? Dry-brained
men upon the continent, the trifling wits of the theatre, accurate
however and expert calculators, tell us that his beauties are balanced
by his faults. The poetical opposition, puffing for popularity, cry
cheerily against them, _his faults are balanced by his beauties_; when,
in reality, all the faults that ever were committed in poetry would be
but as air to earth, if we could weigh them against one single thought
or image, such as almost every scene exhibits in every drama of this
unrivalled genius. Do you hear me with patience?

PORSON.—With more; although at Cambridge we rather discourse
on Bacon, for we know him better. He was immeasurably a less wise man
than Shakespeare, and not a wiser writer: for he knew his fellow-man
only as he saw him in the street and in the Court, which indeed is but
a dirtier street and a narrower; Shakespeare, who also knew him there,
knew him everywhere else, both as he was and as he might be.

SOUTHEY.—There is as great a difference between Shakespeare
and Bacon as between an American forest and a London timber-yard. In
the timber-yard the materials are sawed and squared and set across; in
the forest we have the natural form of the tree, all its growth, all
its branches, all its leaves, all the mosses that grow about it, all
the birds and insects that inhabit it; now deep shadows absorbing the
whole wilderness; now bright bursting glades, with exuberant grass and
flower and fruitage; now untroubled skies; now terrific thunderstorms;
everywhere multiformity, everywhere immensity.

                 “Southey and Porson.” _Imaginary Conversations._
                     _Works_, 1846, i. pp. 12-13.

    This is from the enlarged edition of the _Imaginary
    Conversations_. It does not appear in the original
    Southey-Porson “Conversation” published in 1824.


WILLIAM SCHWENCK GILBERT, 1868

AN UNFORTUNATE LIKENESS

(_b._ 1836)

    I’ve painted Shakespeare all my life,
      “An Infant” (even then at “play”!)
    “A boy” with stage-ambition rife,
      Then “married to Ann Hathaway.”

    “The bard’s first ticket night” (or “ben.”),
      His “First appearance on the stage,”
    His “Call before the curtain”—then
      “Rejoicings when he came of age.”

    The bard play-writing in his room,
      The bard a humble lawyer’s clerk,
    The bard a lawyer—parson—groom—
      The bard deer-stealing, after dark.

    The bard a tradesman—and a Jew—
      The bard a botanist—a beak—
    The bard a skilled musician too—
      A sheriff and a surgeon eke!

    Yet critics say (a friendly stock)
      That, though it’s evident I try,
    Yet even _I_ can barely mock
      The glimmer of his wondrous eye!

    One morning as a work I framed,
      There passed a person, walking hard:
    “My gracious goodness,” I exclaimed,
      “How very like my dear old bard!

    “Oh what a model he would make!”
      I rushed outside—impulsive me!—
    “Forgive the liberty I take,
      But you’re so very”—“Stop!” said he.

    “You needn’t waste your breath or time,—
      I know what you are going to say,—
    That you’re an artist, and that I’m
      Remarkably like Shakespeare. Eh?

    “You wish that I would sit to you?”
      I clasped him madly round the waist,
    And breathlessly replied, “I do!”
      “All right,” said he, “but please make haste.”

    I led him by his hallowed sleeve,
      And worked away at him apace,
    I painted him till dewy eve,—
      There never was a nobler face!

    “Oh sir,” I said, “a fortune grand
      Is yours, by dint of merest chance,—
    To sport _his_ brow at second hand,
      To wear _his_ cast-off countenance!

    “To rub _his_ eyes whene’er they ache—
      To wear _his_ baldness ere you’re old—
      To clean _his_ teeth when you awake—
    To blow _his_ nose when you’ve a cold!”

    His eyeballs glistened in his eyes—
      I sat and watched and smoked my pipe;
    “Bravo!” I said, “I recognise
      The phrensy of your prototype!”

    His scanty hair he wildly tore:
      “That’s right,” said I, “it shows your breed.”
    He danced—he stamped—he wildly swore—
      “Bless me, that’s very fine indeed!”

    “Sir,” said the grand Shakespearean boy
      (Continuing to blaze away),
    “You think my face a source of joy;
      That shows you know not what you say.

    “Forgive these yells and cellar-flaps:
      I’m always thrown in some such state
    When on his face well-meaning chaps
      This wretched man congratulate.

    “For oh! this face—this pointed chin—
      This nose—this brow—these eyeballs too,
    Have always been the origin
      Of all the woes I ever knew!

    “If to the play my way I find,
      To see a grand Shakespearean piece,
    I have no rest, no ease of mind,
      Until the author’s puppets cease.

    “Men nudge each other—thus—and say,
      ‘This certainly is Shakespeare’s son,’
    And merry wags (of course in play)
      Cry ‘Author,’ when the piece is done.

    “In church the people stare at me,
      Their soul the sermon never binds;
    I catch them looking round to see,
      And thoughts of Shakespeare fill their minds.

    “And sculptors, fraught with cunning wile,
      Who find it difficult to crown
    A bust with Brown’s insipid smile
      Or Tomkins’s unmannered frown,

    “Yet boldly make my face their own,
      When (oh, presumption!) they require
    To animate a paving-stone
      With Shakespeare’s intellectual fire.

    “At parties where young ladies gaze,
      And I attempt to speak my joy,
    ‘Hush, pray,’ some lovely creature says,
      ‘The fond illusion don’t destroy!’

    “Whene’er I speak, my soul is wrung
      With these or some such whisperings:
    ‘’Tis pity that a Shakespeare’s tongue
      Should say such un-Shakespearean things!’

    “I should not thus be criticised
      Had I a face of common wont:
    Don’t envy me—now, be advised!”
      And, now I think of it, I don’t!

                              Reprinted from _Fun_, 14 Nov. 1868.

    “The bard a lawyer”—

        “Go with me to a notary: seal me there
         Your single bond.”

                                    _Merchant of Venice_, I. iii.

    “Parson”—

        “And there shall she at friar Laurence’ cell
         Be shriv’d, and married.”

                                      _Romeo and Juliet_, II. iv.

    “Groom”—

        “And give their fasting horses provender.”

                                              _Henry V._, IV. ii.

    “A tradesman”—

        “Let us, like merchants, show our foulest wares.”

                                  _Troilus and Cressida_, I. iii.

    “A Jew”—

        “Then must the Jew be merciful.”

                                     _Merchant of Venice_, IV. i.

    “A botanist”—

              “The spring, the summer,
        The chiding autumn, angry winter, change
        Their wonted liveries.”

                               _Midsummer Night’s Dream_, II. ii.

    “A beak”—

        “In the county of Gloster, justice of the peace, and coram.”

                                  _Merry Wives of Windsor_, I. i.

    “A skilled musician”—

        “What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us?”

                                              _King John_, V. ii.

    “A sheriff”—

        “And I’ll provide his executioner.”

                                          _II Henry VI._, III. i.

    “A surgeon”—

        “The lioness had torn some flesh away,
         Which all this while had bled.”

                                       _As You Like It_, IV. iii.

                                                   W. S. GILBERT.


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, 1872

(1809-1894)

I wonder if anything like this ever happened:—

    Author writing,—

    “_To be, or not to be: that is the question:
     Whether ’tis nobl—_”

    “William, shall we have pudding to-day, or flapjacks?”

    “Flapjacks an it please thee, Anne, or a pudding for that
    matter; or what thou wilt, good woman, so thou come not betwixt
    me and my thought.”

    Exit Mistress Anne, with strongly accented closing of the door,
    and murmurs to the effect: “Ay, marry, ’tis well for thee to
    talk as if thou hadst no stomach to fill. We poor wives must
    swink for our masters, while they sit in their arm-chairs,
    growing as great in the girth through laziness as that
    ill-mannered old fat man, William, hath writ of in his books of
    players’ stuff. One had as well meddle with a porkpen, which
    hath thorns all over him, as try to deal with William when his
    eyes be rolling in that mad way.”

    William—writing once more—after an exclamation in strong
    English of the older pattern,—

    “Whether ’tis nobler—nobler—nobler—

    To do what? O these women! these women! to have puddings or
    flapjacks! Oh!

    “Whether ’tis nobler—in the mind—to suffer
     The slings—and arrows—of—

    Oh! Oh! these women! I’ll e’en step over to the parson’s, and
    have a cup of sack with his reverence, for methinks Master
    Hamlet hath forgot that which was just now on his lips to
    speak.”

              _The Poet at the Breakfast-Table_, 1872, pp. 10-11.


THEODORE WATTS-DUNTON, 1897

“_Shakespeare’s Friend speaks._”

    To sing the nation’s song, or do the deed
    That crowns with richer light the motherland,
    Or lend her strength of arm in hour of need,
    When fangs of foes shine fierce on every hand,
    Is joy to him whose joy is working well—
    Is goal and guerdon too, though never fame
    Should find a thrill of music in his name;
    Yea, goal and guerdon too, though Scorn should aim
    Her arrows at his soul’s high citadel.
    But if the fates withhold the joy from me
    To do the deed that widens England’s day,
    Or join that song of Freedom’s jubilee
    Begun when England started on her way—
    Withhold from me the hero’s glorious power
    To strike with song or sword for her, the mother,
    And give that sacred guerdon to another,
    Him will I hail as my more noble brother—
    Him will I love for his diviner dower.
    Enough for me who have our Shakespeare’s love
    To see a poet win the poet’s goal,
    For Will is he; enough and far above
    All other prizes to make rich my soul.

                 “Christmas at the Mermaid.” _The Coming of Love,
                     and Other Poems_, 1898 [1897].


JUDGE WILLIS, 1902

(_b._ 1835)

“_Examination of Edward Blount, one of the printers and publishers of
the Shakespeare folio of 1623._”

Did you never hear that Shakespeare the actor, whom you knew, had
nothing to do with the pieces published under his name?

I never did.

Did you never hear that the name “Shakespeare,” that is, with the “e”
after the “k,” was assumed to cover and conceal the writings of a very
great, distinguished man?

I never did.

Would you be surprised to hear that Lord Bacon—

The reporter says that as soon as this word escaped from Counsel’s
lips, the whole Court was convulsed with laughter, in which the jury
joined.

To save appearances, the learned Judge retired into his private room,
as he said, in order to fetch his copy of “Venus and Adonis.” His
laughter was heard in the hall.

“We noticed,” says the reporter, “that Mr. Jonson never smiled. He
seemed deeply moved, and exclaimed, ‘What next? And next?’”

On the return of the Judge, the laughter had not quite subsided, and
the usher cried “Order, Order.”

The Judge, on again taking his seat, said to the Counsel for the
defence, “I am sorry, sir, your question should have been so received,
but you must remember the spectators are human, and that the jury and
myself are not free from infirmity. We are, however, quite impartial.”

The Counsel resumed.

Now that this indecent laughter is over, tell me, sir, do you not know
that Lord Bacon was the author of the plays contained in the folio
volume?

I do not know it, and never until now have I heard a doubt cast upon
the authorship of Shakespeare.

Did you never have any communication from Lord Bacon in respect of the
publishing the folio volume?

Never. I never received a paper of any kind from him, nor did I
communicate any portion of the manuscript to him.

Did not Mr. Benjamin Jonson bring you the manuscripts, or some of them,
from which you printed?

“My lord, my lord!” said Jonson.

“Pray be quiet, Mr. Jonson, you will have your turn directly,” said the
Judge.

He did not, nor did he touch any sheet of them. As I have told you, I
never communicated with him until I spoke to him about writing some
lines for the portrait.

Did not Mr. Jonson write the Dedication or Preface?

He wrote neither. Heminge and Condell wrote the Dedication, and the
Address to the Readers they composed in consultation with myself.

Did you not receive money from some one in order to induce you to print
the folio?

I did not. I looked to the sale, and the sale only, to recoup myself
and my co-adventurers.

_Re-examined._—I myself never touched the manuscripts, nor added a line
to them. After they were in my possession, Heminge and Condell never,
to my knowledge, altered the manuscripts, nor did any one else.

I could, if necessary, have written a Dedication and the Address to the
Readers. I wrote a work entitled “A Hospital for Incurable Fools.” I
hope some day such hospital will be founded.

                  _The Shakespeare-Bacon Controversy; A Report of
                      The Trial of an Issue in Westminster Hall,
                      20 June 1627. Read in the Inner Temple
                      Hall, Thursday, May the 29th, 1902_, by
                      William Willis, Treasurer of the Honourable
                      Society of the Inner Temple, pp. 15-16.

    This extract is taken from an account of an imaginary suit in
    connection with the administration of Shakespeare’s estate,
    to determine whether the testator was the author of the plays
    published under the name of William Shakespeare in the folio
    volume of 1623.

           *       *       *       *       *

    The _Dictionary of National Biography_ states that Edward
    Blount (_fl._ 1588-1632), the stationer, has been credited
    on doubtful grounds with the authorship of the very curious
    _Hospitall of Incvrable Fooles: Erected in English, as neer the
    first Italian Modell and platforme as the vnskilful hand of an
    ignorant Architect could deuise. Printed by Edm. Bollifant for
    Edward Blount_, 1600.


_TO MY VERY GOOD FRIEND, MR. WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE_

    _It’s not because I know that you
      Are really what the World has found you,
    That I collect and tell anew
      The tributes that have gathered round you.
    Not moved to tread the lofty ways
      Of those great souls who turned their powers,
    As duty-bounden, to your praise,
      Weave I this little wreath of flowers._

    _You have, I know, a “myriad mind,”
      A “honey tongue” to tell a story;
    You left poor “panting Time” behind,
      (See Johnson) in the race for glory—
    ’Tis true. But when all’s said and done,
      With thought and rhetoric impassioned,
    You’ve been, and are, a Friend to one
      Whose mind is not supremely fashioned._




INDEX


    Addison, Joseph. _Cato_, 18, 23.
      Compared with Shakespeare, 18.
      His contemporary fame, 22.
      _Lines_ to. By William Somervile, and by John Hughes, 23.
      _The Spectator_ (No. 45), 278;
        (No. 592), 84.
      Voltaire’s opinion of, 18.

    Akenside, Mark. _An Inscription_, 105.
      _The Remonstrance of Shakespeare_, 284.

    _Among My Books._ By James Russell Lowell, 174, 266.

    _Appreciations, with an Essay on Style._ By Walter Pater, 193.

    _Argalus and Parthenia._ By Francis Quarles. Possible allusion
        to Shakespeare in, 5 _n._

    Armstrong, John. _Of the Versification of English Tragedy_, 100.
      _Of the Dramatic Unities_, 100.

    Arnold, Matthew. _Essays in Criticism_, 195.
      _Heine’s Grave_, 265.
      His Sonnet on Shakespeare, 29, 169.
      His edition of Wordsworth’s _Poems_, 195.

    _Art of English Poetry._ By Edward Bysshe, 26 _n._

    _At the Mermaid._ By Robert Browning, 31.

    _Autumn Vision, An._ By A. C. Swinburne, 201.


    B., A. _Covent Garden Drollery_, 69.

    _Bab Ballads._ By W. S. Gilbert, 318.

    Bacon, Francis, Lord Verulam, 145.
      Compared with Shakespeare, 168, 316.
      His supposed authorship of Shakespeare’s _Works_, v, 326.

    Bancroft, Thomas. _To Shakespeare_, from _Two Bookes of
        Epigrammes and Epitaphs_, 57.

    Barnfield, Richard. _A Remembrance of some English Poets_, from
        _Poems in Divers Humors_, 36.

    Basse, William. _On Mr. William Shakespeare_, 40.

    _Battaile of Agincourt, The._ By Michael Drayton, 48.

    Baynes, Thomas Spencer. Article on “Shakespeare” in
        _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 207.

    Beaumont, Francis, 40, 42, 80.

    Beddoes, T. L. _Lines written in Switzerland_, 258.

    Betterton, Thomas, seen by Samuel Pepys as Macbeth, 63.

    Bickerstaff, Isaac. _Queen Mab_, 299.

    _Biographia Literaria._ By S. T. Coleridge, 130, 232.

    Blackmore, Sir Richard. His _Creation_, Johnson’s criticism of, 21.

    Blind, Mathilde. _Shakespeare_, from _Shakespeare Sonnets_, 213.

    Blount, Edward, 326-8.

    _Blue-stocking Revels._ By Leigh Hunt, 247.

    Boileau and Pope, 292.

    Boston, Shakespeare Jubilee at, 1824. Prize Ode by Charles Sprague,
        142.

    Boswell, James, the elder. _Life of Dr. Johnson_, 94, 107.

    Boswell, James, the younger. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_,
        20.

    Bowle, John. _Miscellaneous Pieces of Ancient English Poetry_, 26
        _n._

    Bowles, William Lisle. _Monody on the Death of Dr. Warton_, 228.
      _On Shakespeare_, from _Sonnets, with other Poems_, 124.

    Boydell’s Shakespeare Gallery, 148.

    Braybrooke, Lord. Samuel Pepys’ _Diary and Correspondence_, 62.

    Brooke, Stopford A. _Life and Letters of Frederick William
        Robertson_, 164.

    Browne, Felicia Dorothea, afterwards Mrs. Hemans. _England and
        Spain_, 229.
      _Shakespeare_, 128.

    Browning, Elizabeth Barrett. _A Vision of Poets_, 252.

    Browning, Robert. _At the Mermaid_, 31.
      _Christmas Eve and Christmas Day_, 255.
      _The Names_, 204.

    Burlington, Lord, 225.

    Butler, Samuel. _The Court Burlesqu’d._ Possible allusion to
        Shakespeare in, 5.

    Byron, Lord. Letter to Murray, 239.

    Bysshe, Edward. _Art of English Poetry_, 26 _n._


    _Caius Marius, a Tragedy._ Otway’s _Prologue_ to, 72.

    _Canons of Criticism._ By Thomas Edwards, 281, 303, 304 _n._

    Capell, Edward. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 20, 107, 303,
        304 _n._
      Johnson’s criticism of, 304 _n._

    _Caractacus._ By William Mason, 101.

    Carlyle, Thomas. _Chartism_, 249.
      _Critical and Miscellaneous Essays_, 242, 249.
      _Essay on Corn Law Rhymes_ in _Edinburgh Review_, 158.
      _Goethe_, 242.
      _The Hero as Poet_, from _On Heroes and Hero Worship_, 157.
      _Shooting Niagara: and After?_ 264.

    _Catalogue of Printed Books collected by Frederick Locker-Lampson_,
        198.

    _Characteristics of English Poets._ By William Minto, 189.

    _Charge to the Poets, A._ By William Whitehead, 109.

    Charles I. His influence on literature, 12.
      His knowledge of Shakespeare, 7.

    Charles II. His influence on literature, 12.

    _Chartism._ By Thomas Carlyle, 249.

    Chaucer, Geoffrey, 40, 42.

    _Christmas at the Mermaid._ By Theodore Watts-Dunton, 325.

    _Christmas Eve and Christmas Day._ By Robert Browning, 255.

    Churchill, Charles. _The Rosciad_, 108.

    _Citation and Examination of William Shakespeare._ By W. S. Landor,
        30.

    Coleridge, Hartley. _To Shakespeare_, 148.

    Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, ix.
      His achievement as an æsthetic critic, 28.
      _Biographia Literaria_, 130, 232.
      His general dislike of “Selections,” 131.
      His influence on the poetry of the nineteenth century, 27.
      _Letters_, 246.
      _Literary Remains_, 28, 131.
      His notes on _The Tempest_, 132 _n._
      _Outline of an Introductory Lecture on Shakespeare_, 232.
      _Seven Lectures on Shakespeare and Milton_, 232.
      _Table Talk_, 240, 243, 246.

    Collier, John Payne, 162.

    Collins, William. _Verses_ addressed to Sir Thomas Hanmer, 92.

    Colman, George, 224.
      _Prose on several Occasions_, 224.
      His translation of Terence, 224.

    Combe, William. _The Tour of Dr. Syntax in Search of the
        Picturesque_, 308.

    _Coming of Love, The._ By Theodore Watts-Dunton, 325.

    Condell, Henrie, and John Heminge. _To the Great Variety of
        Readers_, from the Shakespeare First Folio, 46.

    _Conduct of Life._ By Ralph Waldo Emerson, 251.

    Congreve, William, 12, 114.

    _Conjectures on Original Composition._ By Edward Young, 104, 224.

    _Connoisseur, The._ Its attitude towards Shakespeare, 21.

    Cook, A. S. Leigh Hunt’s _Imagination and Fancy_, 250.

    _Court Burlesqu’d, The._ By Samuel Butler. Possible allusion to
        Shakespeare in, 5 _n._

    _Covent Garden Drollery._ Collected by A. B., 69.

    Covent Garden Theatre, Dr. Syntax in the pit of, 308.

    _Creation, The._ By Sir Richard Blackmore, 21.

    Crowne, John. _Prologue_ to _Henry the Sixth_, 220.

    Cunningham, Peter. _Letters_ of Horace Walpole, 99, 226, 305.

    _Cymbeline_, 148.


    Daniel, George. _Vindication of Poesie_, 58.

    D’Avenant, Sir William, 53.
      His adaptations of Shakespeare’s Plays, 10.
      _Ode. In Remembrance of Master William Shakespeare_, from
          _Madagascar_, 54.
      His version of _The Tempest_, 67.

    Davies, John. “_To our English Terence, Mr. Will Shakespeare_,” from
        _The Scourge of Folly_, 38.

    Dennis, John. _An Essay on the Genius and Writings of Shakespeare_,
        82.

    De Quincey, Thomas. His article on “Pope” in the _Encyclopædia
        Britannica_, 248.
      His article on “Shakespeare” in the _Encyclopædia Britannica_,
          150, 248.
      His criticism of Pope’s _Preface_, 87 _n._
      His misinterpretation of the allusion to Shakespeare in Milton’s
          _Eikonoklastes_, 8.
      On the knocking at the gate in _Macbeth_, 30, 152 _n._
      _Schlosser’s Literary History_, 254.

    _Dialogues of the Dead._ By Lord Lyttelton, 292.

    _Diary and Correspondence_ of Samuel Pepys, 62.

    Dibdin, J. B. Letter to, from Charles Lamb, 313.

    Digges, Leonard. _To the Memory of the deceased Author, Maister W.
        Shakespeare_: from the Shakespeare First Folio, 47.

    Dodsley, J. His _Collection of Poems by Several Hands_, 26 _n._,
        123.

    Dowden, Edward. _Shakespeare, his Mind and Art_, 28, 190, 267.

    _Dramatic Poesie, An Essay._ By John Dryden, 67.

    _Dramatic Poetry, An Essay on._ By a Person of Honour, 74.

    _Dramatic Race, The_, 298.

    _Dramatic Unities, Of the._ By John Armstrong, 100.

    Drayton, Michael. _To my most dearly-beloved friend Henery
        Reynolds_, from _The Battaile of Agincourt_, 48.

    Dryden, John, 3, 10, 114.
      His contemporary fame, 22.
      _Defence of the Epilogue_, 68.
      The first skilled critic of Shakespeare, 11.
      His influence on eighteenth century literature, 13.
      _Of Dramatic Poesie_, 66.
      _Prologue_ to _The Tempest_, 66.
      _Prologue_ to _Troilus and Cressida_, 67.

    Dyce, Alexander, 162.

    Dyer, George. _Poetics_, 231.


    _Earth’s Holocaust._ By Nathaniel Hawthorne, 314.

    _Edinburgh Review._ Article by Carlyle in, 158.
      Articles by Jeffrey in, 133, 230.
      Articles by Macaulay in, 160, 245.

    Edwards, Thomas, 303, 304 _n._
      _Canons of Criticism_, 281.

    _Edwin and Emma._ By David Mallet, 24.

    _Eikonoklastes._ By John Milton. Allusion to Shakespeare in, 7.

    _Elegie on the Death of the famous Writer and Actor, Mr. William
        Shakespeare_, from Shakespeare’s _Poems_, 55.

    Emerson, Ralph Waldo. _Conduct of Life_, 262.
      _Representative Men_, 162, 251.
      _Shakespeare, or the Poet_, 162.

    _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 150, 208, 248.

    _England and Spain._ By Felicia Dorothea Hemans, 229.

    _Enthusiast, The._ By Joseph Warton, 91.

    _Epigrammes and Epitaphs._ By Thomas Bancroft, 57.

    _Epigrammes in the Oldest Cut and Newest Fashion._ By John Weever,
        37.

    _Epigrams._ By Samuel Sheppard, 59.

    _Epigrams of Art, Life, and Nature._ By William Watson, 270.

    _Epitaph_ on a Tombstone of Shakespeare, 223.

    _Essays, Critical and Imaginative._ By John Wilson, 140.

    _Essays in Criticism._ By Matthew Arnold, 195.

    _Euphrosyne._ By Richard Graves, 225.


    Falstaff, 308.

    Farmer, Richard, 304 and _n._
      _Essay on the Learning of Shakespeare_, 224.

    _Fennell’s Shakespeare Repository_, 40.

    Fenton, Elijah. _An Epistle to Mr. Southerne_, 80.

    _Ferney: An Epistle to Monsr. De Voltaire._ By George Keate, 112.

    Fielding, Henry. _A Journey from this World to the Next_, 279.

    First Folio Edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 6, 42, 45, 46, 47.

    _Five Books of Song._ By Richard Watson Gilder, 212.

    Fletcher, John, compared with Shakespeare, 66, 80, 92.
      His “solecism of speech,” 68.

    Forman, H. Buxton. _Works_ of John Keats, 138.

    _Fors Clavigera._ By John Ruskin, 273.

    Freeman, Thomas. _To Master W. Shakespeare_, from _Runne, and a
        Great Caste_, 39.

    Froude, James Anthony. _Short Studies on Great Subjects_, 167.

    Fuller, Thomas. _The History of the Worthies of England_, 61.

    Furnivall, Dr. Frederick James. _The Leopold Shakspere_, 192.
      _Some 300 Fresh Allusions to Shakspere from 1594 to 1694_, viii,
          5.

    Fuseli, John Henry, 148.


    _Garden Inscriptions._ By William Thomson, 110.

    Garrick, David, 144.
      His criticism of Johnson’s praise of Shakespeare, 94.
      _Epistle_ to. By Robert Lloyd, 106.
      Shakespeare’s debt to, 106.
      His connection with the Shakespeare Jubilee at Stratford-on-Avon,
          25.
      His Shakespeare temple at Hampton, 26, 306-7.
      Verses addressed to, 25.
      _Warwickshire: A Song_, from _Shakespeare’s Garland_, 113.

    Gastrell, Rev. Dr. F., and Shakespeare’s mulberry tree, 10, 185.

    _Genius and Writings on Shakespeare, An Essay on the._ By John
        Dennis, 82.

    _Genius of Shakespeare, To the._ By James Hogg, 146.

    _Gentleman’s Magazine_, 223, 301.

    Gilbert, William Schwenck. _An Unfortunate Likeness_, from _More Bab
        Ballads_, 318.

    Gilder, Richard Watson. _The Twenty-third of April_, from _Five
        Books of Song_, 212.

    Goethe, Carlyle’s Essay on, 242.
      Compared with Shakespeare, 158, 159.

    _Goethe reviewed after Sixty Years._ By J. R. Seeley, 272.

    Goldsmith, Oliver. _A Reverie at the Boar’s Head Inn_, 291.

    Graves, Richard. _On Erecting a Monument to Shakespeare_, from
        _Euphrosyne_, 225.

    Gray, Thomas. _The Progress of Poesy_, 102.

    _Guardian, The._ Its attitude towards Shakespeare, 20.

    _Guesses at Truth._ By Julius Charles Hare, 145.


    Hales, John. Quoted in Rowe’s edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 53.

    Hallam, Henry. _Introduction to the Literature of Europe in the
        Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Seventeenth Centuries_, 155.

    Hamilton, William. _A Soliloquy in Imitation of Hamlet_, 24.

    _Hamlet_, 323.
      Early æsthetic criticism of, 27.

    Hanmer, Sir Thomas. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 16, 93.
      Verses addressed to. By William Collins, 92.

    Hare, Julius Charles. _Guesses at Truth_, 145.

    Hawkins, Sir John, 303, 304 _n._

    Hawthorne, Nathaniel. _Earth’s Holocaust_, from _Mosses from an Old
        Manse_, 314.
      _Our Old Home_, 175.
      On visiting Shakespeare’s house, 175.

    Hayley, William. _A Poetical Epistle to an Eminent Painter_ [_George
        Romney_], 120.

    Hazlitt, William, ix, 28.
      _Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays_, Jeffrey’s review of, 134.
      _On Dryden and Pope_, 136.
      _Lectures on the English Poets_, 135-7, 189, 234.
      _Round Table, The_, 137.
      _On Shakespeare and Milton_, 135, 234.
      _Table Talk_, 237.

    Headley, Henry. _Select Beauties of Ancient English Poetry_, 26 _n._

    _Heine’s Grave._ By Matthew Arnold, 265.

    Hemans, Felicia Dorothea. _England and Spain_, 229.
      _Shakespeare_, 128.

    Heminge, John, and Henrie Condell. _To the great Variety of
        Readers_, from the Shakespeare First Folio, 46.

    _Henry V._ Performance of, witnessed by Samuel Pepys, 62.

    _Henry VI., part I._ John Crowne’s adaptation of, 220.

    _Heroes and Hero Worship, On._ By Thomas Carlyle, 157.

    Higden, Henry. _The Wary Widdow, or Sir Noisy Parrat_, 75.

    _History of England._ By David Hume, 97.

    Hogg, James. _To the Genius of Shakespeare_, from _Songs by the
        Ettrick Shepherd_, 146.

    Holland, Hugh. _Upon the Lines and Life of the Famous Scenick Poet,
        Master William Shakespeare_, from the Shakespeare First Folio,
        45.

    Holmes, Oliver Wendell. _The Poet at the Breakfast Table_, 323.
      _Shakespeare Tercentennial Celebration_, from _Songs of Many
          Seasons_, 177.

    Hood, Thomas. _The Plea of the Midsummer Fairies_, 241.

    _Hospitall of Incurable Fooles_, 328 and _n._

    Hughes, John. _Verses to Mr. Addison_, 23.

    Hugo, Victor. _Shakespeare_, 10, 28.
      On Shakespeare’s posthumous fame, 10.

    Hume, David. _History of England_, 97.

    Hunt, Leigh. _Associations with Shakespeare_ from _Table Talk_, 166.
      _Blue-Stocking Revels_, 247.
      _Thoughts on the Avon_, 233.
      _What is Poetry?_ from _Imagination and Fancy_, 250.

    _Hymn to the Moon._ By D. M. Moir, 257.

    _Hymn to the Nymph of Bristol._ By William Whitehead, 24.


    _Idea of a University, The._ By John Henry Newman, 171.

    _Idea of Comedy, On the._ By George Meredith, 191.

    _Imaginary Conversations._ By Walter Savage Landor, 253, 316.

    _Imagination and Fancy._ By Leigh Hunt, 247.

    _Imitations of Horace._ By Alexander Pope, 221.

    _Immortal Memory of Shakespeare, To the_, 116.

    I. M. S. _On Worthy Master Shakespeare and his Poems_, from the
        Shakespeare Second Folio, 50.
      Coleridge’s conjecture as to the identity of, 7, 52 _n._

    Ingleby, Dr. _Shakespeare’s Centurie of Prayse_, vii, 4.

    _Inscription, An._ By Mark Akenside, 105.

    _In Shakespeare’s Walk._ By William Thompson, 110.

    _Introduction to the Literature of Europe in the Fifteenth,
        Sixteenth, and Seventeenth Centuries._ _By Henry Hallam_, 155.


    James I. His influence on literature, 12, 13.

    Jeffrey, Francis, Lord, 230.
      His article on Hazlitt’s _Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays_ in
          the _Edinburgh Review_, 133.

    Jennens, Charles, 303, 304 _n._

    Johnson, Dr. Samuel, his attitude towards Shakespeare, 16.
      His criticism of Capell’s _Preface_, 107.
      His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 17-18, 111.
      His edition of _British Poets_, 21-22.
      The effect of his judgment on contemporary thought, 19-20.
      His indictment and defence of Shakespeare, 17-18.
      His connection with the Shakespeare Jubilee at Stratford-on-Avon,
          25.
      His _Life_. By James Boswell, 94, 107.
      His position as a literary censor, 14.
      His _Prologue_ at the opening of Drury Lane Theatre, 1747, 94.
      _The Rambler_, 111.

    Jonson, Ben, 74.
      Compared with Shakespeare, 15, 53, 66, 69, 80, 92, 98, 104.
      _To the Memory of My Beloved, the Author_, from the Shakespeare
          First Folio, 42.

    Johnstone, ——. _The Table Talker_, 156.

    _Journey from this World to the Next, A._ By Henry Fielding, 279.


    Keate, George, _Ferney: an Epistle to Monsr. De Voltaire_, 112.

    Keats, John. Letter to George and Georgiana Keats, 236.
      _Notes on Troilus and Cressida_, 138.
      _Sonnet on sitting down to read “King Lear” once again_, 138.

    Kemble, Frances Anne. _To Shakespeare_, 183.

    Kid, Thomas, 43.

    _King Lear_, 145, 148, 214.
      Nahum Tate’s “borrowings” from, 10.
      Sonnet on sitting down to read it once again. By John Keats, 138.

    Knight, Charles. His history of opinion respecting Shakespeare, vii.
      _Studies of Shakespeare_, vii.


    Lamb, Charles, ix.
      Epilogue to an amateur performance of “Richard II.,” 144.
      Letter to J. B. Dibdin, 313.
      Letter to Samuel Rogers on portraits of Shakespeare, 148.
      _Works._ Edited by E. V. Lucas, 144, 148, 313.

    Landor, Walter Savage.
      _Citation and Examination_ of William Shakespeare, 30.
      _Imaginary Conversations_, 253, 316.
      _On Shakespeare_, 253.
      Comparison between Shakespeare and Bacon, 316.
      _Shakespeare and Milton_, from _The lost Fruit off an old Tree_,
          170.

    Lansdowne, Lord, _Epistle_ to. By Edward Young, 83.

    _Learning of Shakespeare, Essay on the._ By Richard Farmer, 224.

    _Lectures on the English Poets._ By William Hazlitt, 135-7.

    Lee, Sidney, and the Shakespeare-Bacon controversy, v.
      _Life of William Shakespeare_, 215.
      _Shakespeare in Oral Tradition_, 5.

    _Leopold Shakspere, The._ Edited by F. J. Furnivall, 192.

    _Library of Old Authors._ By James Russell Lowell, 173.

    Lily, William, 43.

    Lincoln, Abraham, 261.

    _Lines written among the Euganean Hills._ By P. B. Shelley, 235.

    _Lines written in Switzerland._ By T. L. Beddoes, 258.

    _Literary Amusements._ By Daniel Webb, 227.

    Lloyd, David. _State Worthies_, 13.

    Lloyd, Robert. _The Progress of Envy_, 288.
      _Shakespeare, an Epistle to Mr. Garrick_, 25, 106.

    Locker-Lampson, Frederick. His copy of the 1602 Quarto of _The Merry
        Wives of Windsor_, 198.

    _London Cuckolds, The._ By Edward Ravenscroft. A performance of,
        criticised by Steele, 76.

    _Lost Fruit off an old Tree, The._ By Walter Savage Landor, 170.

    _Love’s Labour’s Lost_, 194.
      Dryden’s criticism of, 68.

    Lowell, James Russell. _Among My Books_, 174, 266.
      _Library of Old Authors_, 173.
      On Shakespeare’s “artistic discretion” and the “impersonality” of
          his writings, 174.

    Lucas, E. V. _Works of Charles and Mary Lamb_, 144, 148, 313.

    _Lusiad, The._ By William Julius Mickle, 119.

    _Lyrical Ballads._ By Wordsworth and Coleridge, 27.

    Lyttelton, George, Lord. _Dialogues of the Dead_, 292.

    Lytton, Edward Bulwer, Lord. _The Souls of Books_, 259.


    Macaulay, Thomas Babington, Lord, 295.
      Essay on _The Diary and Letters of Madame D’Arblay_ in the
          _Edinburgh Review_, 160.

    _Macbeth_, 145.
      D’Avenant’s adaptation of, 10.
      De Quincey on the knocking at the gate in, 30.
      Performance of, described by Addison, 278.
      Performances of, witnessed by Samuel Pepys, 62, 63.

    Mackay, Charles. _Mist_, from _Under Green Leaves_, 260.

    _Madagascar._ By Sir William D’Avenant, 54.

    Malone, Edmund. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 20.

    Mallet, David. _Edwin and Emma_, 24.
      _Of Verbal Criticism_, 103.

    Mann, Sir Horace. Letter to, from Horace Walpole, 226.

    Marlowe, Christopher, 43.

    Mason, William. _Caractacus_, 101.

    Massey, Gerald. _The Secret Drama of Shakespeare’s Sonnets_, 209.

    Masson, David. _Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and other Essays_, 168.

    _Merchant of Venice, The._ The _Connoisseur’s_ criticism of, 20.

    Meredith, George. _On the Idea of Comedy_, 191.
      _The Spirit of Shakespeare_, from _Poems and Lyrics of the Joy of
          Earth_, 202.

    Meres, Francis. _Palladis Tamia_, 35.

    _Merry Wives of Windsor._ Manuscript note in 1602 Quarto of, 189.

    Mickle, William Julius. _The Lusiad_, 119.

    _Midsummer Night’s Dream._ Performance of, witnessed by Samuel
        Pepys, 62.

    _Mighty Makers, The._ By William Wetmore Story, 205.

    Milnes, Richard Monckton. _Life, Letters, and Literary Remains of
        John Keats_, 138.

    Milton, John, 127.
      Compared with Shakespeare, 131, 170.
      Credited with authorship of verses signed I. M. S., 52.
      _Eikonoklastes_, 7, 9.
      _An Epitaph on the Admirable Dramatic Poet, W. Shakespeare_, from
          the Shakespeare Second Folio, 49.
      _L’Allegro_, 9.
      Mistaken conception of his attitude towards Shakespeare, 7-10.
      His tributes to Shakespeare, 9-10.

    Minto, William. _Characteristics of English Poets_, 189.

    _Miscellaneous Pieces of Ancient English Poetry._ Collected by John
        Bowle, 26 _n._

    Moir, D. M. _Hymn to the Moon_, 257.
      _Stanzas on an Infant_, 257.

    _Monody written near Stratford-upon-Avon._ By Thomas Warton, 121.

    Montagu, George. Letter to, from Horace Walpole, 99.

    Moore, Thomas. _Life of Byron_, 239.

    _Mosses from an Old Manse._ By Nathaniel Hawthorne, 314.

    Moulton, G. _Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist_, 271.

    _Much Ado About Nothing_, 295.

    _Mystery of Life and its Arts, The._ By John Ruskin, 184.


    _Names, The._ By Robert Browning, 204.

    Newcastle, Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of. _CCXI Sociable Letters_,
        64, 277.

    Newman, John Henry. _The Idea of a University_, 171.

    _New Shakspere Society_, 4.

    Northcote, James, 148.


    Opie, John, 148.

    Ossory, Countess of. Letter to, from Horace Walpole, 305.

    _Othello_, Disputed line in, 279.
      Christopher Smart’s _Prologue_ to, 96.

    Otway, Thomas, 114.
      _Prologue_ to _The History and Fall of Caius Marius_, 72.

    _Our Old Home._ By Nathaniel Hawthorne, 175.


    Palgrave, Francis Turner. _Songs and Sonnets of William
        Shakespeare_, 181.

    _Palladis Tamia._ By Francis Meres, 35.

    Pater, Walter Horatio. _Appreciations, with an Essay on Style_, 193.

    Pattison, William. His verses _To Mr. John Saunders_, 23.

    Pearch, G. His _Supplement_ to Dodsley’s _Collection of Poems by
        Several Hands_, 26 _n._

    Pepys, Samuel. _Diary and Correspondence_, edited by Lord
        Braybrooke, 62.

    Percy, Bishop, 304 and _n._

    _Pericles._ Dryden’s criticism of, 68.

    Phillips, Edward. _Theatrum Poetarum_, 10, 71.

    _Philosophical Analysis of some of Shakespeare’s Remarkable
        Characters._ By William Richardson, 117.

    _Plea of the Midsummer Fairies, The._ By Thomas Hood, 241.

    _Poems and Lyrics of the Joy of Earth._ By George Meredith, 202.

    _Poems by Several Hands._ Collected by J. Dodsley, 26 _n._
      Pearch’s _Supplement_ to, 26 _n._

    _Poems Collected and Arranged anew._ By Archbishop Trench, 180.

    _Poems in Divers Humors._ By Richard Barnfield, 36.

    _Poems on Various Subjects._ Collected by Thomas Tomkins, 26 _n._

    _Poet at the Breakfast Table, The._ By Oliver Wendell Holmes, 323.

    _Poetical Portraits._ By “A Modern Pythagorean,” 244.

    _Poetics._ By George Dyer, 231.

    Pope, Alexander, 225.
      And Boileau, 292.
      His contemporary fame, 22.
      His criticism and defence of Shakespeare, 14-16.
      De Quincey’s criticism of, 87 _n._
      His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 15, 16, 85, 292.
      _Imitations of Horace_, 221.
      On Shakespeare’s learning, 15.

    Porson, Richard, and Robert Southey. Imaginary conversation. By
        W. S. Landor, 316.

    Porter, Endymion, 53.

    _Progress of Envy, The._ By Robert Lloyd, 288.

    _Progress of Poesy, The._ By Thomas Gray, 102.

    _Prose on Several Occasions._ By George Colman, 224.


    Quarles, Francis. _Argalus and Parthenia_, 5 _n._

    _Queen Mab._ By Isaac Bickerstaff, 299.

    Quin, James, 308.


    _Rambler, The._ By Dr. Johnson, 111.

    _Rape of Lucrece._ Edward Phillips’ criticism of, 71.

    Raphael. His picture, _The Transfiguration_, 112.

    Ravenscroft, Edward. _The London Cuckolds_, A performance of,
        criticised by Steele, 76.

    _Reflector, The_, 231.

    _Remonstrance of Shakespeare, The._ By Mark Akenside, 284.

    _Representative Men._ By Ralph Waldo Emerson, 162, 251.

    Restoration adaptations of Shakespeare’s plays, 10-12.

    _Reverie at the Boar’s Head Inn, A._ By Oliver Goldsmith, 291.

    Reynolds, Sir Joshua, 148.

    Richardson, William. _A Philosophical Analysis and Illustration of
        some of Shakespeare’s remarkable characters_, 117.

    Robertson, Frederick William. _Life and Letters_, edited by Stopford
        A. Brooke, 164.

    Rogers, Samuel. Letter to, from Charles Lamb, 148.

    _Romeo and Juliet_, 145, 148.
      Performance of, witnessed by Samuel Pepys, 62.

    Romney, George, 148.
      _Poetical Epistle_ to. By William Hayley, 120.

    _Rosciad, The._ By Charles Churchill, 108.

    Rossetti, Dante Gabriel. _On the Site of a Mulberry Tree planted by
        W. Shakespeare_, 185.

    Rossetti, W. M. _Collected Works_ of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, 185.

    Roubiliac. His statue of Shakespeare, 26, 307.

    _Round Table, The._ By William Hazlitt, 137.

    Rowe, Nicholas. _Some Account of the life of William Shakespeare_,
        78.
      On Shakespeare’s knowledge of the ancients, 78.
      Shakespeare’s first editor, 16.
      His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 53, 78.

    Rowfant Library Catalogue, 198.

    _Runne, and a Great Caste._ By Thomas Freeman, 39.

    Rupert, Prince. His knowledge of Shakespeare, 7.

    Ruskin, John. _Fors Clavigera_, 273.
      _The Mystery of Life and its Arts_, 184.


    Saunders, John. William Pattison’s verses to, 23.

    Schlosser’s _Literary History_. De Quincey’s article on, 254.

    _Schoolmistress, The._ By William Shenstone, 24.

    Scott, Dr. Edward J. L. His discovery of allusions to Shakespeare in
        the Sloane Manuscripts, 5.

    Scott, Sir Walter. His article on “Drama” in the _Encyclopædia
        Britannica_, 129.

    _Scourge of Folly, The._ By John Davies, 38.

    _Seasons, The._ By James Thomson, 88.

    Second Folio edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 7, 10, 49, 50.

    _Secret Drama of Shakespeare’s Sonnets, The._ By Gerald Massey, 209.

    Sedley, Sir Charles. _Prologue_ to _The Wary Widdow, or Sir Noisy
        Parrat_, by Henry Higden, 75.

    Seeley, J. R. _Goethe reviewed after Sixty Years_, 217.

    _Select Beauties of Ancient English Poetry._ Collected by Henry
        Headley, 26 _n._

    Seward, Anna. _On Shakespeare’s Monument at Stratford-upon-Avon_,
        123.

    Shaftesbury, Lord. His estimate of Shakespeare, 10.

    Shakespeare, William. His “artistic discretion,” 174.
      His knowledge and use of the Bible, 176.
      Compared with Addison, 18, 91.
      Compared with Bacon, 168, 316.
      Compared with Fletcher, 92.
      Compared with Goethe, 158, 159.
      Compared with Homer, 82.
      Compared with Ben Jonson, 15, 53, 61, 69, 80, 92, 98, 104, 114.
      Compared with Milton, 131, 170.
      His creation of the fairy world, 83.
      Debased by interpolations, 15, 103.
      The effect of his genius on the taste of the nation, 129.
      His epitaph in Stratford-on-Avon Church, viii, 41.
      First Folio edition of his _Works_, 6, 42, 45, 46, 47.
      History of opinion of, its division into periods, 3.
      The “impersonality” of his writings, 155, 174.
      Influence of eighteenth century research on his reputation, ix.
      Jubilee celebration at Boston, 1824, 142.
      His learning, 79, 224.
      _Life._ By Sidney Lee, 216.
      _Life._ By Nicholas Rowe, 78.
      His monument in Westminster Abbey, 225.
      As a “philosophical aristocrat,” 132 _n._
      Presentation of his plays on the stage, 10-12.
      His _Poems_, 55.
      Popular fallacies relating to his reputation, 6-12.
      Was he influenced by posthumous fame? 137.
      His use of prose, 195.
      His reputation in the seventeenth century, 4-12;
        in the eighteenth century, 12-26;
        in the nineteenth century, 27-30.
      Second Folio edition of his _Works_, 7, 10, 49, 50.
      The “Shakespearean Show,” 1884, 204 _n._
      His “solecism of speech,” 68.
      His statue in Central Park, New York, 186.
      The Stratford-on-Avon Jubilee, 25.
      Tercentennial celebration, 177.
      His time compared with that of Augustus, 72.
      His neglect of the unities, 17, 18.

    _Shakespeare, an Epistle to Mr. Garrick._ By Robert Lloyd, 25.

    _Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist._ By G. Moulton, 271.

    _Shakespeare-Bacon Controversy, The._ By Judge Willis, 326.

    _Shakespeare in oral Tradition._ By Sidney Lee, 5.

    _Shakespeare’s Bedside_, 301.

    _Shakespeare’s Centurie of Prayse._ By Dr. Ingleby, vii, 4.
      Edited by L. Toulmin Smith, viii, 5.

    _Shakespeare’s Garland_, 113, 116, 298, 299, 301.

    _Shakespeare’s Knowledge and Use of the Bible._ By Bishop Charles
        Wordsworth, 176.

    _Shakespeare Sonnets._ By Mathilde Blind, 213.

    _Shakspere: A Critical Study of his Mind and Art._ By Edward Dowden,
        28, 190, 267.

    Shelley, Percy Bysshe. _Lines written among the Euganean Hills_,
        235.

    Shenstone, William. _The Schoolmistress_, 24.

    Sheppard, Samuel. _In Memory of our Famous Shakespeare_, from
        _Epigrams_, 59.

    _Shooting Niagara: and After?_ By Thomas Carlyle, 264.

    _Short Studies on Great Subjects._ By James Anthony Froude, 167.

    Sloane Manuscripts, Allusions to Shakespeare in, 5.

    Smart, Christopher. _Prologue to Othello_, 96.

    Smith, L. Toulmin. Her edition of Ingleby’s _Shakespeare’s Centurie
        of Prayse_, viii, 5.

    _Sociable Letters. By the Lady Marchioness of Newcastle_, 64, 277.

    _Soliloquy in Imitation of Hamlet._ By William Hamilton, 24.

    _Some Remarks on the Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark_, 27.

    Somervile, William. _Lines to Mr. Addison_, 23.

    _Some 300 Fresh Allusions to Shakspere from 1594 to 1694._ Edited by
        Dr. Furnivall, viii, 5.

    _Songs and Sonnets of William Shakespeare._ Edited by Francis Turner
        Palgrave, 181.

    _Songs of many Seasons._ By Oliver Wendell Holmes, 177.

    Sonnets. By Matthew Arnold, 29, 169.
      By Mathilde Blind, 213.
      By Robert Browning, 204.
      By Hartley Coleridge, 148.
      By Richard Watson Gilder, 212.
      By Thomas Freeman, 39.
      By Hugh Holland, 45.
      By John Keats, 138.
      By George Meredith, 202.
      By Dante Gabriel Rossetti, 185.
      By Algernon Charles Swinburne, 29, 201.
      By Archbishop Trench, 180.
      By John Weever, 37.
      By William Wordsworth, 127.

    _Sonnets, with other Poems._ By William Lisle Bowles, 124.

    _Sonnets dedicated to Liberty._ By William Wordsworth, 127.

    _Souls of Books, The._ By Lord Lytton, 259.

    _Southerne, Mr., An Epistle to._ By Elijah Fenton, 80.

    Southey, Robert, and Richard Porson. Imaginary conversation. By
        W. S. Landor, 316.
      _A Vision of Judgment_, 238.

    _Spectator, The_, No. 45. By Joseph Addison, 278.
      No. 592. By Joseph Addison, 84.

    Spenser, Edmund, 40, 42.

    Sprague, Charles. Prize Ode recited at the representation of the
        Shakespeare Jubilee at Boston, 1824, 142.

    _Spirit of Shakespeare, The._ By George Meredith, 202.

    _Stanzas on an Infant._ By D. M. Moir, 257.

    _State Worthies._ By David Lloyd, 13.

    Steele, Sir Richard. _The Tatler_, No. 8, 76.

    Steevens, George. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 20.

    Sterling, John. _Shakespeare_, 153.

    Sterne, Laurence. _Yorick’s Sentimental Journey through France and
        Italy_, 295.

    Story, William Wetmore. _The Mighty Makers_, 205.

    Stratford-on-Avon. Lines _on Shakespeare’s Monument_ at. By Anna
        Seward, 123.
      _Monody_ written near. By Thomas Warton, 121.
      Shakespeare’s epitaph in the church at, viii, 41.

    _Study of Shakespeare, A._ By A. C. Swinburne, 28, 199, 201.

    Suckling, Sir John, 53.

    Swinburne, Algernon Charles. _An Autumn Vision_, 201 _n._
      _A Study of Shakespeare_, 28, 199, 201.
      _William Shakespeare_, from _Tristram of Lyonesse and other
          Poems_, 29, 201.

    Symons, Arthur. _Poetical Works_ of Mathilde Blind, 213.


    _Table Talk._ By S. T. Coleridge, 240, 243, 246.

    _Table Talk._ By William Hazlitt, 237.

    _Table Talk._ By Leigh Hunt, 166.

    _Table Talker, The._ By —— Johnstone, 156.

    _Tancred and Sigismunda._ James Thomson’s _Prologue_ to, 222.

    Tate, Nahum. His “borrowings” from _King Lear_, 10.

    _Tatler, The_, No. 8. By Richard Steele, 76.

    Taylor, Bayard. _Shakespeare’s Statue, Central Park, New York_, 186.

    _Tempest, The_, 145.
      Coleridge’s _Note_ on, 132 _n._
      Dryden’s _Prologue_ to, 66.

    Tennyson, Alfred, Lord, on _King Lear, The Winter’s Tale, and
        Cymbeline_, 214.
      _Life and Works._ Edited by Hallam, Lord Tennyson, 214.

    Tennyson, Hallam, Lord. _Life and Works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson_,
        214.

    Terence, George Colman’s translation of, 224.

    _Theatrum Poetarum._ By Edward Phillips, 10, 71.

    Theobald, Lewis. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 16, 89.

    Thomson, James. _Prologue to Tancred and Sigismunda_, 222.
      _The Seasons_, 88.

    Thomson, William. _In Shakespeare’s Walk_, from _Garden
        Inscriptions_, 110.

    _Thoughts on the Avon._ By Leigh Hunt, 233.

    Tomkins, Thomas. _Poems on Various Subjects_, 26 _n._

    _Tour of Dr. Syntax in Search of the Picturesque, The._ By William
        Combe, 308.

    Trench, Archbishop Richard Chevenix. _Poems Collected and Arranged
        anew_, 180.

    _Tristram of Lyonesse and other Poems._ By A. C. Swinburne, 201.

    _Troilus and Cressida_, Dryden’s _Prologue_ to, 67.

    _Twenty-third of April, The._ By Richard Watson Gilder, 212.

    _Two Worlds, The._ By Richard Watson Gilder, 212.


    _Under Green Leaves._ By Charles Mackay, 260.

    _Unfortunate Likeness, An._ By W. S. Gilbert, 318.


    “Variorum” editions of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 20.

    _Venus and Adonis._ Edward Phillips’ criticism of, 71.

    _Verbal Criticism, Of._ By David Mallet, 103.

    _Versification of English Tragedy, Of the._ By John Armstrong, 100.

    _Vindication of Poesie._ By George Daniel, 58.

    _Vision of Judgment, A._ By Robert Southey, 238.

    _Vision of Poets, A._ By Elizabeth Barrett Browning, 252.

    Voltaire. His comparison of Shakespeare with Addison, 18.
      _An Epistle to._ By George Keate, 112.


    Walpole, Horace, Earl of Orford, 13.
      _Letters_, 99, 226, 305.

    Warburton, Bishop William. His edition of Shakespeare’s _Works_, 95,
        283.
      On Shakespeare’s knowledge of the Ancients, 79.

    Warner, Richard, 303, 304 _n._

    Warton, Joseph, 303, 304 _n._
      _The Enthusiast_, 91.
      _Monody_ on the Death of. By W. L. Bowles, 228.

    Warton, Thomas. His misinterpretation of the Shakespeare allusion in
        Milton’s _Eikonoklastes_, 8.
      _Monody written near Stratford-upon-Avon_, 121.

    _Wary Widdow, or Sir Noisy Parrat, The._ By Henry Higden, 75.
      Sir Charles Sedley’s _Prologue_ to, 75.

    Watson, William. _Epigrams of Art, Life, and Nature_, 270.

    Watts-Dunton, Theodore. _Christmas at the Mermaid_, from _The Coming
        of Love_, 325.

    Webb, Daniel. _Literary Amusements_, 227.

    Weever, John. _Ad Gulielmum Shakespeare_, from _Epigrammes in the
        Oldest Cut and Newest Fashion_, 37.

    West, Benjamin, 148.

    Westminster Abbey, Shakespeare’s Monument in, 225.

    Whitehead, Paul. _Verses dropped in Mr. Garrick’s Temple of
        Shakespeare_, 30.

    Whitehead, William. His Appreciation of Shakespeare, 24.
      _A Charge to the Poets_, 109.
      _An Hymn to the Nymph of Bristol_, 24.

    Whitman, Walt. On Shakespeare’s unacceptability to America and
        Democracy, 210.
      _Poetry to-day in America_, 211.

    Willis, Judge William. _The Shakespeare-Bacon Controversy_, 326.

    Wilson, John. _A Few Words on Shakespeare_, from _Essays, Critical
        and Imaginative_, 140.

    _Winter’s Tale, The_, 145, 214.
      Dryden’s criticism of, 68.

    Wiseman, Cardinal. _William Shakespeare_, 179, 263.

    _Witt’s Recreations_, 219.

    Wordsworth, Bishop Charles. _On Shakespeare’s Knowledge and Use of
        the Bible_, 176.

    Wordsworth, Christopher. _Memoirs of William Wordsworth_, 159, 256.

    Wordsworth, William. His influence on the poetry of the nineteenth
        century, 27.
      _Memoirs._ By Christopher Wordsworth, 159, 256.
      _Poems._ Edited by Matthew Arnold, 196.
      On Shakespeare and Goethe, 159.
      His Sonnet, “It is not to be thought of,” 29, 127.

    _Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and other Essays._ By David Masson,
        168.

    _Worthies of England._ By Thomas Fuller, 61.

    Wycherley, William, 12.


    Young, Edward. _Conjectures on Original Composition_, 104, 224.
      _Epistle to Lord Lansdowne_, 83.

    _Yorick’s Sentimental Journey through France and Italy._ By Laurence
        Sterne, 295.


_Printed by_ MORRISON & GIBB LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


The following corrections have been made to the original text:

    Page vii: but he pays scant attention[original has “attentien”]
    to the nineteenth

    Page 25: his paper kite to fly.”[quotation mark missing in
    original]

    Page 36: RICHARD BARNFIELD[original has “BARNFEILD”], 1598

    Page 78: p. iii.[period missing in original] prefixed to _Works
    of Shakespeare_

    Page 105: Which his own genius only could acquire.”[quotation
    mark missing in original]

    Page 109: dead letter Shakespeare’s noblest scene.[original has
    a comma]

    Page 112: adulatory verses written on the same
    occasion.[letters “sion.” missing in original]—KEATE.

    Page 117: He ceases to be Euripides; he is Medea[original has
    “Meda”]

    Page 123: “[original has a single quote]The British Eagle,”
    _i.e._ Milton.

    Page 129: mistaken the form for the essence[original has
    “esssence”]

    Page 129: as comprehensive and versatile,[comma missing in
    original] as intense

    Page 151: the emblazonries upon Shakespeare’s[original has
    “Shakepeare’s”] shield.

    Page 151: seems the mere rebound of the previous[original has
    “precious”] speech

    Page 206: _Poems._ 1886, vol. ii. pp. 273-4.[period missing in
    original]

    Page 218: _Henry V._[original has “v.”] V. prol. 23.

    Page 300: And men shall give us honour for his sake.”[quotation
    mark missing in original]

    Page 321: Should say such un-Shakespearean things!’[quotation
    mark missing in original]

    Page 331: _Art of English Poetry._[original has a comma] By
    Edward Bysshe

    Page 331: Barnfield[original has “Barnfeild”], Richard.

    Page 331: Bowle, John.[original has a comma] _Miscellaneous
    Pieces of Ancient English Poetry_

    Page 333: under “Dodsley,” 26 _n._[period missing in original],
    123.

    Page 333: Elegie[original has “Elgie”] on the Death of the
    famous Writer

    Page 334: Hanmer[original has “Hamner”], Sir Thomas.

    Page 335: under “Headley, Henry,” 26 _n._[italics added to
    match pattern of Index entries]

    Page 336: Johnstone, ——.[period missing in original] _The Table
    Talker_, 156.

    Page 336: performance of “Richard II.,”[comma missing
    in original] 144

    Page 338: _Poems in Divers Humors._ By Richard
    Barnfield[original has “Barnfeild”], 36.

    Page 340: _Shakespeare’s Centurie of Prayse._ By Dr. Ingleby,
    vii,[original has a period] 4.

    Page 341: under “Stratford-on-Avon,” _Monody_ written near. By
    Thomas Warton, 121.[original has a period after “Warton” and
    “121.” is missing]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Praise of Shakespeare, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRAISE OF SHAKESPEARE ***

***** This file should be named 57863-0.txt or 57863-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/8/6/57863/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
